

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====



===== PDF PAGE 2 =====



===== PDF PAGE 3 =====



===== PDF PAGE 4 =====



===== PDF PAGE 5 =====



===== PDF PAGE 6 =====



===== PDF PAGE 7 =====



===== PDF PAGE 8 =====



===== PDF PAGE 9 =====



===== PDF PAGE 10 =====



===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
1
Introduction
This book is intended to be parallel to From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-
Germanic (2nd ed., 2017); it traces the development of Ancient Greek from PIE
down to roughly the 5th century BC. Experience shows that I need to empha-
size the purpose of the book: it is NOT a comparative and historical grammar
of Greek;¹ it is an attempt to figure out which changes happened when, and to
some extent it has to take knowledge of Ancient Greek for granted. For that rea-
son I have not usually transliterated Greek in this volume. Since readers are most
likely to be familiar with Classical Attic, I have foregrounded that dialect, but the
book is written from the perspective of Ancient Greek as a whole, including the
dialects known only from inscriptions. The intended readership of the volume is
colleagues, students, and interested amateurs who have learned at least some Greek
and internalized the basic concepts of linguistics. Because comprehensive gram-
mars of Ancient Greek are readily available, I have not included a grammatical
sketch of the language at the end of the volume.
Since I have tried to present a coherent account of material that is generally
agreed on, the overall picture of the grammar of Proto-Indo-European and the
development of Greek presented in this volume is relatively conservative. That is
partly a practical decision, but there is also an important principle involved. The
comparative method is applied mathematics, and its results are exceptionally reli-
able for just that reason. When we begin to interpret the results of the method,
trying to push reconstruction further, we are pursuing internal reconstruction—a
much less reliable endeavor—of an already reconstructed language, and the far-
ther we push our interpretation, the less and less likely it becomes that our results
are correct. It seems to me that some colleagues have lost sight of that basic proba-
bilistic fact, and not only recently. Of course some inferences, such as the ‘coloring’
of ∗/e/ by adjacent laryngeals in PIE, are so well supported by the evidence that
they are practically certain, but others are much less certain; the less straightfor-
ward a hypothesis is, the less probable it is. That is why I have taken the decision
to write PIE forms in surface-contrastive notation, why I accept the existence of
PIE underlying ∗/a/, and so on.
I have included innovative suggestions on a small scale when they seemed nec-
essary or appropriate, giving references to earlier publications; I hope that I have
¹ The most comprehensive historical grammar of Greek is still Schwyzer (1939). Also useful are
Chantraine (1963, 1973) (for Homeric Greek), Rix (1976a), and Sihler (1995).


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
2 INTRODUCTION
not forgotten to reference any distinctive views of previous researchers that I have
accepted. Conclusions that are almost universally accepted in the field (such as
the reconstruction of three ‘laryngeal’ consonants for PIE, or—most obviously—
sound changes such as Grassmann’s Law) have not been referenced. Since this is
intended to be a handbook, I have often omitted discussion of alternative opin-
ions; in particular, arguments based on etymologies which I do not accept have
mostly been passed over in silence.
Chapter 2, which describes the reconstructed grammar of PIE, is in principle
identical with Chapter 2 of Ringe (2017): the two narratives start at the same
place, the common ancestor of the languages. However, further work in several
relevant fields has prompted various revisions. The discussion of the ‘homeland’
question has made great progress during the past decade, with the result that the
introduction to Chapter 2 deserved to be expanded; Jasanoff (2018) solved the
‘thorn problem’ so elegantly that all previous discussion has become irrelevant;
and it is becoming increasingly clear that subjunctives are an important key to the
reconstruction of the PIE verb.
Linguistic point of view
It seems only fair to warn the reader that I have also had to presuppose some
prior knowledge of linguistics in order to keep the work within reasonable bounds.
In the following paragraphs I will try to spell out the background that I take for
granted.
I expect readers to have acquired a basic grounding in MODERN linguistics, with-
out necessarily being familiar with the details of any one theory. In phonology I
presuppose an understanding of the principle of phonemic contrast, familiarity
with systems of ordered rules, and an understanding of how surface filters differ
from the latter (but not, for example, familiarity with Optimality Theory). In mor-
phology I presuppose a general understanding of case, tense, aspect, mood, and
the other traditional inflectional categories, as well as the concepts of productivity
and defaults. Though I have little to say about syntax in this volume, what I do say
presupposes some version of generative syntax.
I also expect readers to have a basic familiarity with the principles of language
change. I subscribe to the uniformitarian principle (on which, see Ringe and
Eska 2013: 3–4, 30–1), without which scientific historical linguistics is not pos-
sible; in addition, I define ‘linguistic descent’ as an unbroken series of instances of
native language acquisition by children, and I hold that apparent cases of linguis-
tic descent in the undocumented past should be taken at face value unless there is
convincing evidence to the contrary (see e.g. Ringe et al. 2002: 60–5, Ringe and
Eska 2013: 228). Note especially that I take the regularity of sound change seri-
ously; since investigation of historically documented languages shows that sound


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
LINGUISTIC POINT OF VIEW 3
change is overwhelmingly regular in statistical terms, it is a serious breach of the
uniformitarian principle not to assume the same for prehistory. (Sociolinguistic
studies have not altered this picture; see e.g. Labov 1994: 419–543.) Readers who
want to understand the consequences of the regularity of sound change are urged
to read Hoenigswald (1960), the classic exposition of that subject. Finally, I adopt
the overwhelmingly likely hypothesis that changes in language structure originate
as failures to learn in detail, and that most such learner errors are made by native
learners, i.e. small children. It might be supposed that that insight won’t contribute
much to the investigation of ‘deep’ prehistory, but in fact it has important practi-
cal consequences, especially in dealing with morphological change; an immediate
consequence is that we must replace reliance on ‘proportional analogy’ with a
much more interesting question: what would a three-year-old make of this or that
pattern of data, and what rules would (s)he be likely to abstract from it? Interested
readers should consult Ringe and Eska (2013).
Limitations of space do not permit me to cite full evidence for the standard
reconstructions offered here; I often cite only those cognates that support a par-
ticular reconstruction most clearly. Examples have also been chosen to illustrate
particular points clearly with a minimum of explanation, even though that limits
the range of examples that can be used. But I wish to emphasize that everything
said in this volume rests on scientific reconstruction from attested languages using
the ‘comparative method’. In other words, these conclusions are based on observa-
tion and logical inference (mathematical inference, in the case of phonology), not
on speculation. Readers who are not already familiar with the principles of histor-
ical linguistics are urged to read one of the many good elementary textbooks on
the subject.
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0001


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
2
Proto-Indo-European
2.1 Introduction
The earliest ancestor of Greek that is scientifically reconstructable is Proto-Indo-
European (PIE), the ancestor of all the Indo-European (IE) languages. As is usual
with protolanguages of the distant past, we can’t say with certainty where and when
PIE was spoken; recent work in several disciplines has led to the following fairly
complex picture.
For decades the place where PIE was spoken has seemed most likely to be the
river valleys of Ukraine in the 5th millennium BC (the ‘steppe hypothesis’); it has
been accepted that IE languages spread from that area by means of substantial pop-
ulation movements. The archaeological evidence is laid out extensively in Anthony
(2007), and the archaeological and linguistic evidence is discussed in Anthony and
Ringe (2015). The most prominent alternative, an origin in Anatolia as much as
three millennia earlier, was first proposed in Renfrew (1987); in addition, Renfrew
proposed a spread of IE languages with the spread of farming, but without much
population movement, westward through Greece into the rest of Europe. That
alternative has never been accepted by most Indo-Europeanists. Some computa-
tional cladistic analyses, beginning with Gray and Atkinson (2003), found dates for
PIE that are compatible with Renfrew’s hypothesis, but Chang et al. (2015) showed
that the addition of unobjectionable ‘ancestry constraints’ to Gray and Atkinson’s
model—for instance, the requirement that Latin be the ancestor of the Romance
languages in the phylogenetic tree—compressed the calculated time depth so as to
yield dates consistent with the steppe hypothesis instead.¹
The debate just summarized was completely transformed by the advent of
ancient DNA analysis. Haak et al. (2015) demonstrated from ancient DNA evi-
dence that there was a massive migration from the steppes into Europe at exactly
the time that the steppe hypothesis posits (as well as an earlier migration from
the eastern Mediterranean). It is now generally accepted that the non-Anatolian
IE languages, at least, radiated from somewhere north of the Black Sea beginning
around 3500 BC, the probable date when the ancestors of the Tocharians abruptly
moved far to the east (Anthony and Ringe 2015: 208).
¹ This is ultimately a result of technical details of Gray and Atkinson’s algorithm. For discussion, see
Chang et al. (2015: 217–24, especially fn. 25).


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
2 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
However, how the speakers of Anatolian languages reached Anatolia is uncer-
tain. They could have moved from the northern to the southern shore of the Black
Sea before the radiation of the non-Anatolian languages, but a movement of the
ancestors of ‘Nuclear IE’ (see below) in the opposite direction is also at least possi-
ble. Further DNA evidence will almost certainly be forthcoming in the future, and
we can hope that it will resolve that question.
Though there continue to be gaps in our knowledge of PIE, a remarkable
proportion of its grammar and vocabulary is securely reconstructable by the com-
parative method. As might be expected from the way the method works, the
phonology of the language is relatively certain. Though syntactic reconstruction
is in its infancy, some points of PIE syntax are uncontroversial because the earli-
est attested daughter languages agree so well. Nominal morphology is also fairly
robustly reconstructable, with the exception of the pronouns, which continue to
pose interesting problems. Only the inflection of the verb causes serious difficulties
for Indo-Europeanists, for the following reason.
From the well-attested subfamilies of IE which were known at the end of the 19th
century—Indo-Iranian, Armenian, Greek, Albanian, Italic, Celtic, Germanic, and
Balto-Slavic—a coherent ancestral verb system can be reconstructed. The general
outlines of the system are already visible in Karl Brugmann’s classic Grundriss der
vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen (2nd ed., 1897–1911);
in recent decades Warren Cowgill, Helmut Rix, and other scholars have codified
and systematized that reconstruction along more modern lines. The result is per-
haps the standard reconstruction among more conservative Indo-Europeanists; it
is sometimes called the ‘Cowgill-Rix’ verb, though ‘Indo-Greek’ might be a more
apt designation.² Various versions of the Indo-Greek reconstruction can be found
in Rix (1976a: 190 ff.), Rix et al. (2001), and the handbooks cited below. Unfor-
tunately it is quite difficult to derive the system of the Hittite verb—by far the
best known Anatolian verb system, and fortunately also the most archaic—from
the Indo-Greek reconstruction of the PIE verb by natural changes, and even the
Tocharian verb system presents us with enough puzzles and anomalies to raise
the suspicion that the PIE verb system was somewhat different. A thorough explo-
ration of this question is Jasanoff (2003a); a good summary discussion is Clackson
(2007: 114–56). Though Jasanoff ’s reconstruction as a whole has not won general
acceptance, a number of his individual observations must be correct.
Interestingly, there is by now a general consensus among Indo-Europeanists
that the Anatolian subfamily is, in effect, one half of the IE family, all the other
subgroups together forming the other half; and it is beginning to appear that
² In fact Cowgill strongly disagreed with at least one point in the conservative reconstruction,
namely the view that the Hittite hi-conjugation can be descended from a PIE perfect (see especially
Cowgill 1979). I therefore follow Clackson (2007: 115) in naming the model after the most conserva-
tive daughters on which its reconstruction is based, replacing his term ‘Greco-Aryan’ with my preferred
alternative ‘Indo-Greek’.


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
2.1 INTRODUCTION 3
within the non-Anatolian subgroup, Tocharian is the outlier against all other sub-
groups (cf. Winter 1998, Ringe et al. 1998, Ringe 2000, Ringe, Warnow, and Taylor
2002 with references, Jasanoff 2003b). A probable cladistic tree of the IE family is
roughly as in Figure 2.1.³
PIE
↙ ↘
↙↘
AnatolianNuclear IE
↙↘
↙↘
Tocharian Core IE
↙ ↘
↙↘
Italo-CelticCentral IE
↙↘
↙↘
CelticItalic
Figure 2.1 A probable cladistic tree of the
Indo-European family
(On the Italo-Celtic subgroup, see also Jasanoff 1997 and Weiss 2012, both with
references; for an attempt to sort out Proto-Italic and Proto-Italo-Celtic develop-
ments, see Schrijver 2006: 48–53.) The ‘Central’ subgroup includes Germanic,
Balto-Slavic, Indo-Iranian, Armenian, Greek, and probably Albanian; its inter-
nal subgrouping is still very unclear, though it seems likely that Indo-Iranian,
Balto-Slavic, and Germanic were parts of a dialect chain at a very early date.
Note the implications of this phylogeny for the reconstruction of the PIE verb.
The Indo-Greek verb is a reasonable reconstruction of the system for ‘Core IE’, and
can even account for most of the ‘Nuclear IE’ system; it is only for the ancestor of
the whole family that it is seriously inadequate.
That is fortunate for anyone proposing to write a prehistory of Greek, because
Greek is clearly one of the Central subgroups of the family. Though I will discuss
some of the problems to be faced in trying to reconcile the Anatolian, Tocharian,
and Core IE verb systems, my discussion of the development of the Greek verb in
detail will start roughly from Core IE.
The consequences of this subgrouping for lexical reconstruction are also signif-
icant. Because Anatolian is half the family, a word or morpheme cannot strictly
be reconstructed for PIE unless it has reflexes in at least one Anatolian language
and at least one non-Anatolian language, and since Anatolian is lexically divergent
from the other daughters and is not as well attested as some others, the number
³ Since this cladistic tree is relatively new, there are no generally accepted names for many of the
higher order internal nodes. Following Chang et al. (2015), I adopt ‘Nuclear IE’ for the non-Anatolian
clade; the other names are simply stopgaps (though note that Jasanoff 2018 also uses ‘Core IE’). For
full discussion and some alternative suggestions, see now Olander (2019).


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
4 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
of items which can be reconstructed for PIE with confidence is somewhat limited.
On the other hand, the phonologies of Nuclear IE, Core IE, and even Central IE
were almost identical to that of their ancestor PIE (so far as we can tell). Since we
are dealing with a subgroup of Central IE, it does not matter much how far back an
inherited item can be traced, and I will loosely cite as ‘PIE’ items which are recon-
structable for any of the internal nodes in the tree above except those restricted
to Italo-Celtic. Words confined to two or three adjacent subgroups of Core and
Central IE will be cited as ‘post-PIE’.
The rest of this chapter will present a brief sketch of PIE grammar as recon-
structed from the grammars of the daughter languages by standard application
of the comparative method. In recent years a range of introductions to PIE have
become available, and the interested reader should consult them as well. Tichy
(2006) provides a concise introduction (mostly standard, though with a few
idiosyncracies), including a good bibliography; Meier-Brugger (2010) covers the
same material in much more detail. Clackson (2007) focuses instead on points that
are still under discussion; his chapter on the verb covers much of the same ground
as my discussion in 2.3.3. Beekes (2011), like the older books referenced at the
end of this paragraph, discusses historical linguistics in general as well as IE lin-
guistics. Fortson (2010: 53–169) is a brief sketch comparable to this one; both his
book and Mallory and Adams (2006) are much broader in scope than the other
volumes mentioned, including much information on PIE archaeology and cul-
ture. Older treatments of PIE that are still worth consulting include Sihler (1995)
and Szemerényi (1996). All the above books, except Clackson’s, present some ver-
sion of the Indo-Greek verb. Beekes’ rejection of a PIE phoneme ∗/a/ distances his
treatment a bit from the others; Szemerényi’s reluctance to accept the PIE ‘laryn-
geals’ is by now obsolete, though his discussion of other points is valuable. Further
information about particular topics can be found in the references cited below.
2.2 PIE phonology
A complete presentation of what is known about PIE phonology is beyond the
scope of this book. Here I present only the main outlines and some of the more
interesting quirks. The standard reference is Mayrhofer (1986), to which readers
are referred for further information, with references, on every point discussed in
this section. A more modern synthesis, making somewhat different judgments of
some of the evidence and referring to much recent work in the field, can be found
in Byrd (2015: 5–40).⁴
⁴ For an interesting hypothesis regarding the origins of the admittedly unusual PIE sound system,
see Ku¨mmel (2012).


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 5
The phonology of PIE was very unlike that of any modern IE language. The
system of surface-contrastive sounds, in which I will cite PIE forms, was as follows:
Obstruents:
bilabial coronal palatal velar labiovelar (glottal?)
p t ḱkkʷ
(b?) d ǵ ggʷ
bʰ dʰ ǵʰ gʰgʷʰ
s h₂ h₃ (?) h₁
Sonorants: High vowels: Non-high vowels:
y (~ i) w (~ u) i u e a o
r (~ r̥) īū ēāō
l (~ l̥)
n (~ n̥ )
m (~ m̥ )
There was also a system of pitch accent: one syllable of each phonological word
exhibited high pitch on the surface, customarily marked with ´ in reconstructions.
Numerous peculiarities of this system call for comment.
2.2.1 PIE obstruents
The palatal, velar, and labiovelar stops are collectively referred to as ‘dorsals’. Their
exact pronunciation is not reconstructable; all we can say for certain is that the
‘palatals’ were pronounced further forward in the mouth than the others, and that
the ‘labiovelars’ were pronounced with lip-rounding but were otherwise identical
with the ‘velars’.⁵ That PIE possessed stops of all three types is no longer controver-
sial, since Craig Melchert has demonstrated that the three-way contrast between
the voiceless stops ∗ḱ, ∗k, and ∗kʷ is preserved in Luvian before front vowels
(Melchert 1987, 2012b); for instance, we find Luvian ziyar ‘(s)he is lying down’
< PIE ∗ḱéyor, kīsa(i)-‘to comb’ < ∗kes-, and kui ‘what?’ < ∗kʷíd. A further indica-
tion that the triple contrast is not some kind of artifact of the comparative method
can be found in a simple constraint on the shape of PIE root-syllables: though
a root could not contain oral stops at the same place of articulation both in its
⁵ In any case it is most unlikely that the ‘palatals’ were really palatal stops; in many IE languages
they became velars, and as Michael Weiss pointed out to me many years ago, shifts of palatal stops
to velars are at best very rare in the attested historical phonologies of natural human languages (so
Ku¨mmel 2007: 241–3). The palatals were also clearly the commonest dorsals (though not by a very
wide margin), which suggests that they were typologically the unmarked set, i.e. probably really velars.
I have retained the traditional terms, instead of replacing them with ‘velars, postvelars, labiopostvelars’,
to avoid confusion. For further discussion, see especially Ku¨mmel (2007: 310–27).


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
6 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
onset and in its coda,⁶ there were roots which contained both a palatal and a velar
(∗ḱenk- ‘to hang’, ∗kreḱ- ‘to strike’, ∗koḱso- ‘joint’) or both a palatal and a labiove-
lar (∗kʷeḱ- ‘to catch sight of ’), and perhaps both a velar and a labiovelar (post-PIE
∗kneygʷʰ- ‘to bow’).
The ‘voiced aspirate’ stops were probably breathy-voiced; their reflexes are still
breathy-voiced in many modern Indic languages.
The distribution of PIE stops was in some ways idiosyncratic. The voiced bil-
abial stop ∗b might have been absent from the PIE inventory (see especially
Olander forthcoming, on which this discussion is based). The only reasonably
good example with an Anatolian reflex is ∗ gʰrebh₂- ‘grasp’ (Hitt. karpiezzi ‘(s)he
lifts’, Skt aor. 3sg. ágrabʰīt, OCS inf. grabiti; see the discussion at LIV s.v.), since
∗leb- ‘lick’ (Hitt. lilipai ‘(s)he licks’; Melchert 1994a: 93, Lat. labium ‘lip’, OE lippa)
is likely onomatopoeic; the only good example shared by Tocharian and Core IE
is ∗dʰewb- ‘deep’ (Toch. B tapre ‘high’, Goth. diups).⁷ Most surprising of all was
a series of constraints on the shapes of root-syllables. A root could not contain
two voiced stops, nor could it contain both a voiceless stop and a voiced aspirate
unless the former occurred in a root-initial cluster with ∗s. Thus, among poten-
tial roots with an initial coronal and a final velar, only the following could have
occurred:
∗tek-∗dek-———
∗teg-——— ∗dʰeg-
——— ∗degʰ-∗dʰegʰ-
(Cf. the actually reconstructable roots ∗teḱ- ‘to produce’, ∗teg- ‘to cover’, ∗deḱ-
‘to accept’, ∗delǵʰ- ‘to be firm’, ∗dʰyoh₃gʷ- ‘to insert, to stab’, ∗dʰegʷʰ- ‘to burn’.)
The types ‘∗tegʰ-, ∗deg-, ∗dʰek-’ did not occur—though the type ∗stegʰ- did (cf.
at least ∗ spr̥ dʰ- ‘contest’, ∗skabʰ- ‘to scrape’, ∗skabʰ- ‘to prop’, ∗sperǵʰ- ‘to hurry’,
∗stembʰH-⁸ ‘to prop’, ∗steygʰ- ‘to step’).
⁶ Apparently this constraint classed ∗m with the bilabial oral stops; that is, there were no roots like
‘∗pem-’ and ‘∗mebʰ-’, including both a bilabial oral stop and ∗m. However, ∗n was not classed with
the coronal oral stops, since we must reconstruct ∗nadʰ- ‘to tie’, ∗newd- ‘to push’, ∗ten- ‘to stretch’, etc.
Three clear exceptions to the constraint, ∗tewd- ‘to beat’, ∗tend- ‘to cut’, and ∗mems- ‘meat’, are securely
reconstructable; it is of course not surprising that they involve coronal stops and ∗m. Other apparent
exceptions, such as ∗bʰrem- ‘to make a noise’, either appear to be onomatopoeic or are not securely
reconstructable for PIE proper, so far as I am aware.
⁷ ‘River’ is sometimes reconstructed as ∗h₂ábon- < ∗∗h₂ép-h₃en-, presumably ∗‘containing running
water’, in an attempt to connect it with Skt ā́ pas ‘the waters’ (cf. Wodtko et al. 2008: 311–17). But
while all the Italic and Celtic cognates are n-stems (or derived from n-stems), some of the Anatolian
derivatives are not (Kloekhorst 2008 s.v. ḫapa-); therefore a reconstruction ∗h₂ábʰo(n)- seems more
likely. Germanic river names that might contain a cognate with PGmc ∗p < PIE ∗b (Neri 2009: 8 with
references) are not a convincing counterargument, because the putative meaning of a name cannot be
checked against other evidence.
⁸ It is customary to write ‘∗H’ for a laryngeal the precise identity of which cannot be reconstructed—
a problem that recurs fairly often, since most daughter languages merged the laryngeals in many
environments.


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 7
Both the typological oddity of a system with voiced aspirates but no voiceless
aspirates and the apparent dearth of parallels to the constraints just described have
led some scholars to propose a ‘glottalic hypothesis’, according to which the PIE
voiced stops were really ejectives, while the other manners of articulation were
voiceless and voiced (perhaps with non-contrastive aspiration; see e.g. Gamkre-
lidze and Ivanov 1973). But a stop system with a similar set of contrasts is actually
attested in the Indonesian language Kelabit (first reported in Blust 1974), and
Madurese seems to have gone through a similar stage relatively recently; moreover,
adopting the glottalic hypothesis makes it very difficult to account for the shapes
of the oldest stratum of Iranian loanwords in Armenian, which the traditional
reconstruction explains with ease (Meid 1987: 9–11). Most mainstream Indo-
Europeanists have therefore rejected the glottalic hypothesis, or at least regard it
as unproven (cf. e.g. Vine 1988).⁹
The pronunciation of the three ‘laryngeals’ (symbolized as h’s with subscript
numerals) can be reconstructed only approximately, and their position in the chart
above should not be taken very seriously; note especially that the third laryngeal
did not pattern like a labiovelar consonant. We can at least be confident that all
the laryngeals were obstruents of some kind, because they behaved like obstruents
with respect to the syllabification rules (see 2.2.4 (ii)). ∗h₂ was clearly a voiceless
fricative pronounced far back in the mouth, to judge from its reflexes in the Ana-
tolian languages (the only subgroup in which it usually survives as a consonant).
∗h₃ seems to have been voiced and apparently exhibited lip-rounding, to judge
from the fact that it rounded adjacent short ∗e (see 2.2.4 (i)). For recent discussion
of the phonetics of those two laryngeals, see Melchert (2011) and Weiss (2016).
About the pronunciation of ∗h₁ nothing can be said with certainty except that it
was an obstruent. It should be clear that ‘laryngeals’ is an anachronistic misnomer,
retained only because it has become standard in the field. For comprehensive
discussion, see Ku¨mmel (2007: 327–36).
There seem to have been very few constraints on the distribution of ∗s and
the laryngeals, to judge from the reconstructability of such roots as ∗ses- ‘to be
asleep’, ∗h₁yeh₁- ‘to make’, ∗h₁reh₁- ‘to row’, ∗h₃omh₃- ‘to swear’, ∗h₂weh₁- ‘to blow’,
∗h₂anh₁- ‘to breathe’, ∗h₂arh₃- ‘to plow’, etc., and full words like ∗h₂áwh₂o-s ‘grand-
father’, ∗h₁óh₃s ‘mouth’, ∗h₁nḗh₃-mn̥ ‘name’, and ∗h₂wl̥h₁-no- ‘wool’. ∗s was by far
the commonest obstruent in the language; ∗h₂ was perhaps the second most com-
mon in a lexical count, though ∗t may have been commoner in speech because it
occurred in so many suffixes and endings.
⁹ It might also be observed that although the glottalic hypothesis might yield a less odd system of
consonants for PIE, it would force us to posit a large number of sound changes that have few parallels
(Wolfgang de Melo, p.c.).


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
8 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
2.2.2 PIE sonorants and high vowels
One of the more unusual features of PIE phonology was the existence of a class of
‘sonorants’ (or ‘resonants’) whose syllabicity was determined by rule. They appear
to have been underlyingly non-syllabic; in fact, almost all the syllabic sonorants
which are reconstructable for PIE can be derived from underlyingly non-syllabic
segments by the rules discussed in 2.2.4 (ii).
The one clear exception to that generalization involves the high front vocalics.
Though most of the short syllabic high vowels can be derived from underlying ∗/y/
and ∗/w/, there were a few examples of syllabic ∗i in positions where underlying
∗/y/ should have surfaced as non-syllabic ∗y; for instance, though non-syllabic
sonorants normally occurred in the context VC__V, where the first vowel was
short and C indicates any single non-syllabic, ∗i also occurred in that position.
The clearest examples are derivatives from locatives in ∗-i, e.g. Rigvedic Skt trisyl-
labic ápyas (i.e. ápias) ‘in the water’ (adj.; Mayrhofer 1986: 161) and Gk πεδίον
‘plain’ ← ∗‘(thing) at the foot (of the mountain)’ (Hoenigswald 1985). A possible
widely attested example is ∗néwios ‘new’ (a derivative of ∗néwos ‘new’ with a suf-
fix of unclear function; cf. Rigvedic Skt trisyllabic návyas—i.e. návias—and Welsh
newydd < Proto-Celtic ∗nowi(y)os < ∗néwios). The syllabic ∗i of ∗néwios con-
trasted with the ∗y of ∗ályos ‘other’ and ∗sewyós ‘left(-hand)’ in the same prosodic
environment (cf. Rigvedic Skt disyllabic savyás ‘left(-hand)’ and Welsh eil ‘other’
without the additional syllable of newydd). It seems that the ∗i of ∗néwios can
only have been an underlying vowel ∗/i/. (See Mayrhofer 1986: 160–1, 168 for
discussion and further examples.)¹⁰
Though I know of no similar syllabification evidence for an underlying vowel
∗/u/, there is another phenomenon which probably reflects PIE ∗/u/. Though
nearly all PIE roots contained a non-high vowel and were subject to the phono-
logical rules collectively called ‘ablaut’ (see 2.2.4 (i)), there were a handful of
non-ablauting roots, and the most securely reconstructable example is ∗bʰuH-
(∗bʰuh₂- ?) ‘to become’, with invariant ∗u. Unless we wish to posit a root which
never contained a vowel in PIE, we ought to recognize an underlying high vowel
∗/u/ in this root.
If the above analysis is correct, it makes the occurrence of ∗ī and ∗ū, which were
likewise very rare, somewhat less puzzling: in addition to the (underlyingly non-
syllabic) sonorants, PIE had genuine high vowels, both long and short, though
they were rare. As we will see in the next section, many other PIE underlying
vowels were also surprisingly rare.
¹⁰ For ‘new’ a reconstruction ∗néwiHos is phonologically possible; it is not clear to me that it
makes sense morphologically. Note that I write ∗-iV-, ∗-uV- where some write ∗-iyV-, ∗-uwV- (or the
equivalent); there is no actual difference.


===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 9
2.2.3 PIE non-high vowels
The PIE system of non-high vowels, simple as it seems on the surface, was prob-
ably even simpler underlyingly. The vowels exhibited extensive alternations in
morphologically related forms according to the following patterns:
ē ~ e ~ 0 ~ o ~ ō
ā ~ a ~ 0
It seems clear that ∗/e/,∗/a/ were the underlying segments in most cases, and that
the other vowels were derived from them by various phonological rules, which had
generally been morphologized to a greater or lesser extent (see 2.2.4 (i)). The sys-
tem is referred to as ‘ablaut’; the alternants of each series are called ‘ablaut grades’,
so that it is customary to speak of ‘e-grade, o-grade, zero grade’, and so on.
Roots and words which appear to exhibit underlying ∗/a/ are few enough that
the ‘Leiden school’ has tried to explain them all away; Lubotsky (1989) and Pronk
(2019) are reasoned arguments for that position. It is true that apparent ∗a follow-
ing an obstruent might actually reflect underlying ∗/h₂e/, unless the obstruent is
an unaspirated stop and the word is attested in Indo-Iranian (in which ∗h₂ aspi-
rated an immediately preceding stop). But ∗a following a sonorant is less easy to
dispense with, since a sonorant preceding ∗h₂ ought to have become syllabic unless
another syllabic preceded (see 2.2.4 (ii)). Moreover, ∗h₂ survives as h-in Hittite,
Palaic, and Luvian and as x-in Lycian; thus a PIE word whose reflexes begin with
a-in Latin and Greek but do not begin with a consonant in the Anatolian lan-
guages is most straightforwardly reconstructed with ∗a-. It is admittedly possible
to construct sets of phonological rules and levelings that will account for most of
the examples, but the simpler solution seems preferable, other things being equal,
because it relies on the mathematics of the comparative method—especially given
the known weakness of typological arguments. The following list includes a large
proportion of the better examples of ∗/a/ (not all of which would be reconstructed
with ∗/a/ by every Indo-Europeanist who accepts its existence): ∗ar- ‘to fit’, ∗ay- ‘to
give’, ∗ay- ‘to be hot’, ∗aydʰ- ‘to burn (intr.)’, ∗bʰrag- ‘to break’, ∗h₂wap- ‘evil’, ∗Hyaǵ-
‘to worship’, ∗kalh₁- ‘to call’, ∗kan- ‘to sing’ (of birds), ∗karp- ‘to pluck’, ∗kaw- ‘to
hit’, ∗kwas- ‘to kiss’, ∗kwath₂- ‘to bubble’, ∗ḱad- ‘to fall’, ∗ḱas- ‘gray’, ∗labʰ- ‘to take’,
∗lad- ‘beloved’, ∗nadʰ- ‘to tie’, ∗nas- ‘nose’, ∗plak- ‘to be pleasing’, ∗sak- ‘holy’, ∗sal-
‘to jump’, ∗sark- ‘to be whole’, ∗skabʰ- ‘to prop’, ∗skabʰ- ‘to scrape’, ∗stag- ‘to drip’,
∗tag- ‘to touch’, ∗war- ‘to burn (intr.)’, ∗albʰós ‘white’, ∗ályos ‘other’, ∗átta ‘dad’, ∗awl-
‘tube’, ∗bʰágos ‘a share’, ∗dáḱru ‘tear (i.e. eye-water)’, ∗dayh₂wḗr ‘brother-in-law’,
∗ gʰebʰal- ‘head’, ∗ǵʰáns ‘goose’, ∗kápros ‘male (animal)’, ∗kátus ‘fight’, ∗kawl- ‘shaft’,
∗laywós and ∗skaywós ‘left(-hand)’, ∗pláth₂us ‘wide’, ∗sáls ‘salt’, ∗sámh₂dʰos ‘sand’,
∗sasyóm ‘grain’, ∗sáwsos ‘dry’, ∗smáḱru ‘beard’, ∗táwros ‘bull’, ∗wástu- ‘settlement’.
(Cf. Melchert 1994a, Ringe 1996, Rix et al. 2001 passim, Wodtko et al. 2008 pas-
sim; the discussion of ∗swad- or (more likely) ∗/sweh₂d-/ ‘pleasant’ by Seebold


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
10 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
1967 and Stang 1974 gives a good idea of the problems involved.) A large propor-
tion of the words which exhibit a in the daughter languages can be shown to reflect
PIE underlying ∗/h₂e/, and many other examples are ambiguous.
Since long vowels and ∗o which cannot be derived from underlying ∗/e/ and ∗/a/
were even rarer, it is clear that ∗/e/ was overwhelmingly the most common under-
lying vowel, and the most common underlying segment, in PIE. Like the fairly
large obstruent system, this is reminiscent of the situation in Northwest Caucasian
languages, though the PIE system was typologically less extreme.
Whether words could begin with vowels in PIE is unclear, since apparent initial
vowels might actually have been preceded by ∗h₁, which was lost word-initially
before a vowel in all the daughters (and so can be definitely reconstructed in that
position only from related forms beginning with ∗h₁C-).
2.2.4 PIE phonological rules
A remarkable amount of the phonological rule system of PIE can be reconstructed.
Only the most important rules are discussed here.
2.2.4 (i) Ablaut and laryngeals
The default underlying vowel ∗/e/ was replaced by ∗o in a wide variety of morpho-
logical environments. Fuller details will be given in the discussion of PIE inflection
and derivation (2.3 and 2.4); here I give only a general outline of the system.
Some ablauting nouns exhibited ∗o in the root-syllable in the ‘strong’ cases (the
nominative, accusative, and vocative), but ∗e or 0 in the ‘weak’ cases (the remain-
ing cases of the paradigm, roughly speaking); typical examples include ∗pód- ~
∗ped- ‘foot’ and ∗ḱwón- ~ ∗ḱun- / ∗ḱwn̥ - ‘dog’. The same pattern reappears in
the indicative of some ablauting verb stems, in which the singular active had ∗ o
in the root, but the rest of the paradigm had ∗e or 0. In Hittite this pattern is
characteristic of the most archaic stratum of the ‘hi-conjugation’ (e.g. sākki ‘(s)he
knows’, sekkanzi ‘they know’ < ∗sók- ~ ∗sék- (Melchert 1994a: 81, pace Kloekhorst
2008 s.v.); dāi ‘(s)he puts’, tiyanzi ‘they put’ < ∗dʰóh₁-i- ~ ∗dʰh₁-i-). In Core IE
(see above) it had become restricted to the ‘perfect’ stem; 0 is usual in the weak
forms (cf. e.g. ∗memóne ‘(s)he has in mind’, ∗memnḗr ‘they have in mind’), but
see Jasanoff (2003a: 32–3, 40–2) for relics of e-grade weak forms in Indo-Iranian.
For PIE we must reconstruct surface ∗e in other types of noun and verb stems
in exactly the same phonological environments in which the above types exhib-
ited ∗o; thus it is clear that the o-grade rule had already been morphologized
in PIE.
Some types of polysyllabic ablauting nouns and adjectives exhibited ∗o in the
final syllable of the stem in the strong cases when that syllable was unaccented
and followed by an overt ending (e.g. in acc. sg. ∗swésor-m̥ ‘sister’); it looks as


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 11
though ∗o might have replaced 0 in a position in which the latter had become
inadmissible, though the phenomenon is not well understood. The pretonic root-
syllables of derived causative verbs also appeared in the o-grade (e.g. in ∗woséyeti
‘(s)he clothes (someone)’), for reasons that are likewise not understood. A con-
siderable number of derived nominals, especially thematic nouns, also exhibited
o-grade roots.
It is clear from the above that the o-grade rule was triggered by a disjunct set of
morphological environments that had no apparent connection with one another.
It appears that underlying ∗/a/ did not undergo this rule.
In all types of ablauting stems an underlying non-high vowel was often deleted
when it was unaccented on the surface; the same zero-grade rule also applied fre-
quently in derivation. The correlation between lack of surface accent and lack
of a vowel was still fairly robust in PIE, and it is clear that lack of accent was
the original environment in which the rule applied. However, reconstructable
exceptions in both directions—i.e. cases in which the rule unexpectedly failed
to apply, on the one hand, and zero-grade syllables which unexpectedly bore a
surface accent, on the other—are numerous enough to demonstrate that the rule
had already been at least partly morphologized in PIE. Instances of unaccented
∗o have been mentioned above; clear instances of unaccented ∗e in ablauting
nouns include ∗pedés ‘of a foot’ (cf. Lat. pedis), ∗nébʰesos ‘of a cloud’ (cf. Homeric
Gk νέφεος; Hitt. nēpisas ‘of the sky’), etc. Instances of accented zero-grade sylla-
bles include ∗h₂ŕ̥ tḱos ‘bear’ (the animal), ∗wĺ̥kʷos ‘wolf ’, ∗septḿ̥ ‘seven’, ∗ń̥ - ‘un-’,
and instances of regularly syllabified ∗/y/ and ∗/w/ in such forms as ∗mustís ‘fist’
and ∗suh₃nús ‘offspring, son’; instances of ∗í and ∗ú that never alternated with
∗y and ∗w can, of course, have been underlying high vowels (see the discussion
in 2.2.2).
The ablaut pattern of the ‘thematic vowel’, a largely functionless morpheme that
was the stem-final segment in large numbers of verb, noun, and adjective stems,
was unique. It underwent the zero-grade rule only when immediately followed by
some derivational suffixes (such as ∗-yó-, which formed adjectives from nouns).
Moreover, the e- and o-grades of the thematic vowel appear to have been condi-
tioned by the segment that followed immediately, but differently in verbs and in
nominals. In verb stems the e-grade appeared word-finally (i.e. when there was
no ending or a zero-ending, e.g. in imperative 2sg. ∗wérye ‘say!’), before a Core
IE e-grade subjunctive suffix (see below), and before coronal obstruents (which
were very common in verb endings; cf. e.g. ∗wéryesi ‘you say’, ∗wéryeti ‘(s)he says’,
etc.). The o-grade appeared elsewhere, including before ∗h₂ (cf. e.g. ∗wéryonti ‘they
say’, ∗wéryomos ‘we say’, ∗wéryowos ‘the two of us say’, Nuclear IE ∗wéryoh₂ ‘I say’,
Central IE ∗wéryoyd ‘(s)he would say’; on the ending of the last, see 2.2.4 (iv)).
In nominals the e-grade originally appeared only word-finally and before ∗h₂ (e.g.
in voc. sg. ∗swéḱure ‘father-in-law!’ and neut. collective ∗werǵáh₂ ‘work’ (underly-
ingly /-éh₂/, see below)), while the o-grade appeared elsewhere, including before


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
12 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
endings beginning with ∗e (e.g. in nom. sg. ∗swéḱuros and ∗wérǵom, and in dat.
sg. ∗swéḱuroey ‘to/for (the) father-in-law’). Thus most forms of thematic nominals
exhibited the o-grade of the thematic vowel, and for that reason thematic nominal
stems are often called ‘o-stems’.
There was at least one phonological rule (with morphological triggers) which
lengthened vowels directly: in some ablauting nouns and adjectives and in a few
types of ablauting verb stems, the root-vowel was lengthened in the strong cases
and the indicative singular active respectively. Thus we are able to reconstruct
∗h₁nḗh₃mn̥ ~ ∗h₁nóh₃mn- ‘name’ (the latter with underlying ∗/-é-/), ∗Hyḗkʷr̥ ~
∗Hyékʷn- ‘liver’, ∗mḗh₁n̥ s ~ ∗méh₁n̥ s- ‘moon’, ∗mḗms ~ ∗méms- ‘meat’, ∗wḗsu-s
~ ∗wésu- ‘good’, ∗h₁ḗd-s-ti ‘(s)he’s eating’ but ∗h₁éd-n̥ ti ‘they eat’, ∗wḗḱ-ti ‘(s)he
wants’ but ∗wéḱ-n̥ ti ‘they want’, ∗wḗǵʰ-s-t ‘(s)he brought it (in a vehicle)’ but
∗wéǵʰ-s-n̥ d ‘they hauled it’, and likewise ∗ nā́ s-h₁e ~ ∗nás- ‘nose, nostrils’, ∗ wā́ stu ~
∗wástu- ‘settlement’ (cf. Narten 1968, Schindler 1975a: 5–6, 1975b: 262, Oettinger
1979: 100, Normier 1980: 254, 262 fn. 42, Strunk 1985, Ringe 1996: 70–1).
Long vowels also arose by contraction of adjacent identical vowels or by com-
pensatory lengthening. The latter process will be discussed in 2.2.4 (iv). Two
instances of vowel contraction are worth noting here, and both require some expla-
nation. In athematic verb stems the subjunctive mood reconstructable for Core
IE was marked by suffixing the thematic vowel; for instance, to aorist indica-
tive ∗ gʷém-d ‘(s)he stepped’, ∗ gʷm-énd ‘they stepped’ corresponded subjunctive
∗ gʷém-e-ti ‘(s)he will step’, ∗ gʷém-o-nti ‘they will step’. (The subjunctive was the
only category in which the thematic vowel had a grammatical function.) In the
Core IE subjunctive of thematic stems the (functionless) thematic vowel of the
stem and the subjunctive vowel contracted into a long vowel; thus to present
indicative ∗ gʷm̥ -sḱé-ti ‘(s)he’s walking (i.e. stepping iteratively)’, ∗ gʷm̥ -sḱó-nti
‘they’re walking’ corresponded subjunctive ∗ gʷm̥ -sḱḗ-ti (= /-sḱé-e-ti/) ‘(s)he will
walk’, ∗ gʷm̥ -sḱṓ-nti (= /-sḱó-o-nti/) ‘they will walk’. The other instance of vowel
contraction occurred in the context of a derivational process called ‘proto-vr̥ ddhi’.
The rule seems originally to have worked as follows: an ablauting nominal stem
was put in the zero grade, the vowel ∗e was inserted into it (not necessarily in the
same position as its underlying vowel), and an accented thematic vowel was suf-
fixed. For instance, to form a proto-vr̥ ddhi derivative from ∗dyew- ‘sky’ one took
the zero-grade ∗diw-, inserted ∗e to give ∗deyw- (sic), and so derived ∗deyw-ó-s
‘god’ (literally ‘skyling’). At some point this rule was extended to non-ablauting
stems that already contained ∗e, and the two ∗e’s then contracted into a long vowel;
for instance, from ∗swéḱuros ‘father-in-law’ was formed ∗swēḱurós ‘male mem-
ber of father-in-law’s household’. This is the historical source of the derivational
process called vr̥ ddhi in Sanskrit.
The short e-grade vowel ∗e, but not any of the other vowels in the ablaut sys-
tem, had distinctive allophones when adjacent to the second and third laryngeals.
Next to ∗h₂ it was ∗a, apparently indistinguishable from underlying ∗/a/; next to


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 13
∗h₃ it was ∗o, apparently indistinguishable from underlying ∗/o/.¹¹ Thus underly-
ing ∗/h₂éwis/ ‘bird’ must have been pronounced approximately as ∗[χáwis], and
∗/stéh₂t/ ‘(s)he stood up’ approximately as ∗[stáχt]; and we can’t be certain what
underlying vowel the first ∗o of ∗h₃ósdos ‘branch’ reflects. (But the laryngeal
had no effect on the ∗o of ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-iéti ‘(s)he’s sharp-eared’, so far as we can
tell, nor on the ∗ē of ∗ḗh₂gʷʰ-ti ‘(s)he’s drinking’; cf. Beekes 1972, Eichner 1973,
Jasanoff 1988a, Kimball 1988, Kim 2000a.) All the daughter languages, even in the
Anatolian subfamily, show the effects of these ‘vowel-coloring’ rules.
As might be expected, the coloring rules complicate the task of reconstruction
considerably, and we are often constrained to rely on indirect inference in recon-
structing PIE underlying forms. For example, we can be reasonably certain that
the etymon of Toch. B ā´sa¨ṃ ‘(s)he leads’, Skt ájati ‘(s)he drives’, Gk ἄγει ‘(s)he
leads’, and Lat. agit ‘(s)he drives’ should be reconstructed as underlying ∗/h₂éǵeti/
because a derived noun ∗h₂óǵmos ‘drive, path of driving’ is also reconstructable
(cf. Gk ὄγμος ‘furrow, swath, path of a heavenly body’), and underlying ∗/a/ is not
known to have been subject to the o-grade rule. On the other hand, the first syl-
lable of ∗mah₂tḗr ‘mother’ participates in no alternations of any kind, and though
we are fairly certain that the word contained ∗h₂ (because of the parallel with
∗ph₂tḗr ‘father’ and ∗dʰugh₂tḗr ‘daughter’), we do not really know whether the
vowel immediately preceding it was ∗/e/ or ∗/a/. If it was really somehow derived
from a ‘nursery word’ of the mama-type, ∗/a/ is actually more likely, as Michael
Weiss observed to me many years ago.
Since I write surface-contrastive segments in PIE forms, readers should remem-
ber that every ∗a next to ∗h₂ either is or could be underlying ∗/e/. When it is
clear that ∗o next to ∗h₃ is underlying ∗/e/, that will be noted explicitly unless it
is obvious from context.
How much reinterpretation by language learners the coloring rules caused
within the PIE period is unclear. But the loss of laryngeals in most daughters cer-
tainly caused the outcomes of these rules to be reinterpreted as underlying, and a
wholesale restructuring of the ablaut system necessarily resulted in every daughter
language.
Finally, it should be noted that laryngeals not adjacent to syllabics were appar-
ently deleted by three different rules. A laryngeal which was separated from an
o-grade vowel by a sonorant, but was in the same syllable as the o-grade vowel, was
dropped (cf. Beekes 1969: 74–6, 238–42, 254–5, Nussbaum 1997 with references).
¹¹ I do not believe that the Indo-Iranian sound change called Brugmann’s Law (BL) distinguishes
the two. Which examples of BL reflect regular sound change and which reflect rule extension is of
course a matter of judgment, but it seems to me that BL as a regular sound change cannot be shown to
have lengthened ∗o except before a single sonorant followed immediately by a vowel (before the loss
of laryngeals occurred); it follows that pátis ‘master, husband’ < ∗pótis, áhis ‘serpent’ < ∗h₃ógʷʰis, etc.,
are not relevant to BL. The short vowel of ávis ‘sheep’ reflects leveling on gen. sg. ávyas ← ∗h₂áwis, etc.
(see 2.3.4 (ii)).


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
14 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
For instance, whereas the laryngeal of ∗dʰeh₁- ‘put’ survived in the derived noun
∗dʰóh₁mos ‘thing put’ (cf. Gk θωμ´ος ‘heap’ and OE dōm ‘judgment’, both with
long vowels that reveal the prior presence of a laryngeal), that of ∗terh₁- ‘bore’
was dropped in ∗tórmos ‘borehole’ (cf. Gk τ´ορμος ‘socket’ and OE þearm ‘intes-
tine’). The most important application of this rule was in the Central IE thematic
optative, in which the sequence ∗/-o-yh₁-/ was reduced to ∗-oy- in most forms.
Further, by ‘Pinault’s Rule’ laryngeals were dropped between an underlying non-
syllabic and ∗/y/ (in that order) if there was a preceding syllable in the same word
(cf. Peters 1980: 81 fn. 38 with references and especially the comprehensive discus-
sion of Pinault 1982); thus, though the present (i.e. imperfective) stem of ∗sneh₁-
‘twist, spin’ was ∗snéh₁ye/o-, with the laryngeal preserved (cf. Gk νῆι ‘(s)he’s spin-
ning’, the η of which can only reflect ∗ē < ∗eh₁, and OIr. sniïd ‘(s)he twists’, with i
< ∗ī < ∗ē < ∗eh₁), that of ∗werh₁- ‘say’ was ∗wérye/o- (cf. Homeric Gk ἐ̄́ ρωι ‘I say’;
a PIE present ∗wérh₁yeti would have given ‘ἐρέει’ in Homeric Greek). Finally, it
seems clear that a laryngeal was dropped if it was the second of four underly-
ing non-syllabics and was followed by a syllable boundary (Hackstein 2002b with
references). For example, the oblique stem of ∗/dʰugh₂tér-/ ‘daughter’, underly-
ingly ∗/dʰugh₂tr-/, surfaced as ∗dʰugtr- with the laryngeal dropped (at a point in
the derivation before the operation of Sievers’ Law; on which, see 2.2.4 (ii)); the
daughters have all leveled in one direction or the other.
2.2.4 (ii) Syllabification of sonorants
PIE syllabification is the topic of much ongoing research; recent treatments
include Cooper (2015) and Byrd (2015). The former treats selected topics, includ-
ing the syllabification of sonorants, in depth; the latter attempts a unified explana-
tion for all the (complex) phenomena, including Sievers’ Law (see further below).
Here only the most essential outline will be sketched.
In a large majority of cases the syllabification of sonorants can be predicted by
a simple rule (Schindler 1977b: 56) as follows. Vowels were unalterably syllabic
and obstruents (including laryngeals) unalterably non-syllabic. Each sequence of
one or more sonorants was syllabified as follows. If the rightmost member of the
sequence was adjacent to a syllabic (i.e. a vowel, on the initial application of the
rule), it remained non-syllabic, but if not, it was assigned to a syllable peak. The
rule then iterated from right to left, the output of each decision providing input
to the next. Forms of ∗ḱwon- ‘dog’ neatly illustrate the process. The zero grade
was underlyingly ∗/ḱwn-/ (since full-grade forms show that the high vocalic was
an alternating sonorant, not an underlying syllabic high vowel). The genitive sin-
gular ∗/ḱwn-és/ ‘dog’s, of a dog’ was syllabified as follows: the ∗n was adjacent to
a vowel and therefore remained non-syllabic; consequently the ∗w was not adja-
cent to a syllabic, and it therefore surfaced as syllabic ∗u, giving ∗ḱunés (cf. Skt
´súnas, Gk κυν´ος). On the other hand, the locative plural ∗/ḱwn-sú/ ‘among dogs’
was syllabified as follows: the ∗n was not adjacent to a vowel and therefore became


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 15
syllabic ∗ n̥ ; consequently the ∗w was adjacent to a syllabic and therefore remained
non-syllabic, giving ∗ḱwn̥ sú (cf. Skt ´svásu).
However, there were systematic exceptions to this rule. Most strikingly, the zero
grade of the stem-forming nasal infix ∗-né- seems to exhibit only non-syllabic
reflexes in the daughter languages when a sonorant precedes; for instance, the
zero grade of the Core IE present stem ∗linékʷ- ‘be leaving behind’ is always a
reflex of ∗linkʷ-, never of the ‘∗l̥yn̥ kʷ-’ that the syllabification rule predicts. In
addition, the i-stem and u-stem accusative endings are always sg. ∗-im, ∗ -um,
pl. ∗-ins, ∗-uns, likewise contrary to the general rule. The output of underlying
∗CRRV- also regularly violates the rule if a sequence ∗CRR̥ C- occurs elsewhere in
the paradigm; for instance, gen. pl. ∗trióHom ‘of three’ exhibits the same syllabifi-
cation as loc. pl. ∗trisú ‘among three’, though by rule ‘∗tr̥ yóHom’ would be expected.
Of course leveling and/or morphological changes in the daughter languages might
have obscured the original situation, but the fact that all attested reflexes of
these forms violate the simple right-to-left rule argues strongly that the situa-
tion in PIE was more complex. For further discussion, I refer the reader to Byrd
(2015).
The output of the basic syllabification rules was input to a further adjustment
rule known as ‘Sievers’ Law’ (SL). The correct formulation of SL is still under dis-
cussion; see most recently Byrd (2015: 183–207) for an Optimality Theory analysis
and Barber (2013) for the Greek evidence (both with full bibliography of earlier
treatments, of which the most comprehensive is Seebold 1972). For the purposes
of this sketch I will assume that SL was originally an exceptionless ‘natural’ phono-
logical rule that applied to all sonorants in a simply statable environment; the
reality in Central IE (as reflected in Rigvedic Sanskrit, for example) was almost
certainly more complex. The maximally simple formulation is the following: if a
non-syllabic sonorant was immediately preceded by two or more non-syllabics,
or by a long vowel and a non-syllabic, it was replaced by the corresponding syl-
labic sonorant. For instance, the adjective-forming suffix ∗-yó-¹² appeared with
non-syllabic ∗y in ∗pedyós ‘of feet; on foot’ (of which the derivational basis was
∗/ped-/ ‘foot’; cf. Gk πεζ´ος ‘on foot’, with ζ < ∗dy), but with syllabic ∗i in ∗neptiós ‘of
grandsons/nephews’ (basis ∗/nept-/ ‘grandson/nephew’; cf. Gk ἀνεψι´ος ‘cousin’
(with analogical ἀ-), Av. naptiiō ‘descendant’, late Church Slavonic netĭjĭ ‘nephew’).
There seems likewise to have been a syllabic ∗i in ∗(h₂)ōwióm ‘egg’, possibly
(though not certainly) a derivative of ∗h₂áwis ‘bird’. Similarly, the present-stem
forming suffix ∗-yé- ~ ∗-yó- appeared with non-syllabic ∗y in ∗ wr̥ ǵyéti ‘(s)he’s
working’, but with syllabic ∗i in ∗h₂ḱh₂owsiéti ‘(s)he is sharp-eared’. The other
¹² There were probably two or more suffixes of this shape with different functions; for instance, the
∗-yó- of ∗pedyós ‘on foot’ might have been delocative, while that of ∗neptiós cannot have been (Barber
2013: 205; I am grateful to Michael Weiss for calling this to my attention). For present purposes what
matters is that all were underlyingly ∗-yó-.


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
16 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
sonorants seem to have behaved in a similar fashion in PIE, to judge from
sychronically isolated forms in the daughter languages (though the rule remained
productive in the attested daughter languages only in applying to ∗/w/ and—
especially—∗/y/). For instance, ∗/n/ remained non-syllabic after a light syllable in
∗Hyaǵnós ‘reverend, worshipful’ (cf. Gk ἁγν´ος ‘holy, chaste’, Skt yajñás ‘sacrifice’)
but became syllabic after a heavy syllable in ∗pl̥th₂n̥ ós ‘broad’ (cf. Proto-Celtic
∗litanos ‘broad’ > OIr. lethan, Welsh llydan; superlative substantivized in Homeric
Gk πλατάνιστος ‘plane tree’, lit. ‘the broadest one’) and apparently in ∗dh₂pn̥ óm
‘sacrificial meal’ (cf. Gk δαπάνη ‘expense’, originally a collective with shifted
accent).
It should be emphasized that there was no ‘converse of SL’ replacing syllabic
sonorants or high vowels with non-syllabic sonorants after light syllables in PIE;
the evidence against it (such as the reconstructable adjective ∗néwios ‘new’, cited
above) is much stronger than the evidence against the glottalic hypothesis, for
example (on which, see above). See Barber (2013: 28–30) for discussion and
references.
A phenomenon called ‘Lindeman’s Law’ might originally have been a special
case of SL affecting word-initial CR-clusters (where C indicates any non-syllabic
and R indicates a sonorant; Schindler 1977b: 64). In the case of monosyllabic
forms which began underlyingly with /CR-/, we find cognates with reflexes of
non-syllabic sonorants and those with reflexes of syllabic sonorants in no par-
ticular pattern (Lindeman 1965); for instance, the accusative singular of the word
meaning ‘sky, day’ seems to be reconstructable both as ∗dyḗm (reflected, e.g., in
Doric Gk acc. sg. Ζῆν-α ‘Zeus’) and as ∗diḗm (reflected, e.g., in Lat. acc. sg. diem
‘day’). Both syllabifications of the Sanskrit reflex (dyā́ m, diā́ m) are attested in the
Rigveda. Lindeman’s Law apparently continued to apply to all sonorants at a much
later period than SL. It could originally have been the result of SL applying within
phrases and thus affecting word-initial CR-clusters, but that is difficult to estab-
lish (see the discussion of Barber 2013: 48, 52–65). In particular, the apparent
restriction of the alternation to monosyllabic forms is odd and difficult to assess. If
Lindeman’s Law was really a special case of SL, polysyllabic forms conceivably
were affected by yet another PIE rule applying only to words and sensitive to
word-length; possibly innovative rules in the daughter languages have obscured
the picture; possibly the reflexes of the alternants of underlyingly monosyllabic
forms have simply survived better in the daughters.
The labial sonorants exhibited a striking type of exceptional behavior: in
the word-initial clusters ∗ mn-, ∗ mr-, ∗ml-, ∗ my-, ∗wr-, and (therefore probably)
∗wl-, both sonorants were non-syllabic; clearly reconstructable examples include
∗mréǵʰus ‘short’, ∗mléwHti ‘(s)he says’, ∗myewh₁- ‘move’, ∗wrah₂d- ‘root’, and the
extended verb root ∗mnah₂- ‘think about’ (Neri 2009: 6–7). It is possible that at
least some of the unalterably non-syllabic sonorants were obstruents at some pre-
PIE period; as Warren Cowgill observed to me more than forty years ago, the fact


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 17
that ∗/b/ was absent in PIE might imply that pre-PIE ∗∗b had become ∗w.¹³ On the
other hand, labial sonorants might have been exempt from the basic syllabification
rule at some pre-PIE stage, in which case this phenomenon would simply be an
archaism.
2.2.4 (iii) Some rules affecting obstruents
The contrast between velar and labiovelar stops is not reconstructable next to ∗ w,
∗ u, or ∗ū; evidently it was neutralized in that position (cf. Weiss 1993: 153–65 with
references, 1995: 137–9). We conventionally write velars (the unmarked member
of the opposition). Thus from the ‘Caland’ root ∗h₁lengʷʰ- ‘light (in weight)’ (see
2.4.2 (ii)) were formed the adjectives ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰrós (with the labiovelar preserved
between ∗ n̥ and ∗r; cf. Gk ἐλαφρ´ος) and ∗h₁léngʰus (with the corresponding
velar next to ∗u; cf. Gk ἐλαχύς ‘little’, Skt ragʰús ‘swift’, both reflecting remodeled
∗h₁ln̥ gʰús with a zero-grade root).
The sibilant fricative ∗/s/, which was underlyingly voiceless, seems to have been
voiced to ∗[z] before voiced stops (e.g. in ∗nisdós ‘seat, lair, nest’); it probably
also had a breathy-voiced allophone before breathy-voiced stops (e.g. in ∗misdʰó-
‘reward’).
Underlying ∗/ss/ was simplified to single ∗s. For instance, the 2sg. pres. indic. of
‘be’, composed of the stem ∗h₁és- and the personal ending ∗-si, surfaced as ∗h₁ési
‘you are’ (cf. Skt ási, Gk εἶ < ∗éhi < ∗ési). The two ∗/s/’s didn’t always belong to dif-
ferent morphemes; some become adjacent in zero-grade formations. For instance,
∗h₂áwses- ‘ear’ appeared with two zero-grade syllables before the nom.-acc. dual
ending, and the underlying form ∗/h₂uss-íh₁/ surfaced as ∗h₂usíh₁ ‘two ears’ (cf.
Szemerényi 1967a: 67–8).¹⁴
Geminate coronal stops apparently appeared on the surface only in nursery
words (∗átta ‘dad’; cf. Hitt. attas ‘father’, OCS otĭcĭ ‘father’ (with a diminutive suf-
fix), and Lat. atta, Gk ἄττα, respectful terms of address for old men); possibly
those were the only lexical items in which they were intramorphemic. Where two
coronal stops were brought together by morphological processes, however, an ∗ s
was inserted between them. For instance, addition of the verbal adjective suffix
∗-tó- to the root ∗yewg- ‘join’ yielded ∗yugtós ‘joined’, but addition of the same
suffix to ∗bʰeyd- ‘split’ yielded ∗bʰidstós ‘fissile’. The s-insertion rule still operates
in Hittite (cf. e.g. adwēni ‘we eat’ but aztēni ‘you (pl.) eat’, where the ending is -tēni
and z = /ts/); in the non-Anatolian daughters the complex clusters it created were
simplified.
¹³ So also Schindler (1972b: 3), who however suggests ∗∗b > PIE ∗m. Though the number of exam-
ples with ∗m is considerably larger, there is a greater probability that ∗m was syllabified differently at
some pre-PIE stage; see 2.3.6 (i) for a probable example with references.
¹⁴ Though the final VC-sequences of PIE disyllabic nouns are conventionally treated as suffixes in
discussions of ablaut, they typically have no recoverable meanings or functions and must therefore not
(or no longer) have been separate morphemes synchronically.


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
18 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
Our understanding of ‘thorn clusters’ in PIE has evolved over the past several
decades. A century ago specialists confronted the following unusual (though not
unique) comparative problem. In the position after a dorsal stop, Sanskrit sibilants
normally correspond to Greek -σ-, while Sanskrit coronal stops normally corre-
spond to Greek -τ- and -θ-; for instance, Skt dákṣiṇas ≈ Gk δεξι´ος ‘right(-hand)’
(< ∗deḱsi-), while Skt aṣṭáu = Gk ὀκτ ω´ ‘eight’ (< ∗oḱtṓw). But there are also cog-
nate pairs in which Sanskrit sibilants correspond to Greek -τ- or -θ-, e.g. Skt ŕ̥ kṣas
= Gk ἄρκτος ‘bear’, Skt kṣam-= Gk χθον- ‘earth’. It appeared that there was some
third consonant, neither ∗s nor a dental stop, that could follow dorsal stops, and
Karl Brugmann reconstructed the final segment of such clusters algorithmically as
‘∗þ’ (so that ‘bear’, for example, was ‘∗ŕ̥ ḱþos’); but since PIE ∗þ occurred nowhere
else in the language, Brugmann’s solution never seemed plausible. The discovery
of Hittite and Tocharian provided new evidence suggesting that the thorn clusters
were actually clusters of coronal plus dorsal, in that order; for instance, whereas
‘earth’ had been reconstructed as ‘∗ǵʰþem-’, the Hittite nominative and accusative
singular tēkan instead suggested ∗dʰ(e)ǵʰem- (cf. Schindler 1967a). The problem
then became how clusters of the shape ∗TK could have evolved into clusters of the
shape KT or Ks.
A complex hypothesis was gradually evolved to accommodate all the compara-
tive evidence (see Merlingen 1957, 1962, Mayrhofer 1983, Pinault 2006b, Ringe
2010 with references). However, Jasanoff (2018) has made a convincing case
for a phonetically motivated development of ∗TK to ∗TʲKʲ (with palatalization),
followed by phonetically motivated metathesis to ∗KʲTʲ in Core IE.
For the prehistory of Greek what happened to the reduplicated present stem
∗té-teḱ-ti ‘(s)he produces’ (root ∗teḱ-) in Core IE is especially instructive. The zero-
grade forms were subject to the rules given immediately above; for instance the
3pl., underlyingly ∗/té-tḱ-nti/, surfaced as ∗téḱʲtʲn̥ ti in Core IE. Some daughters
extracted ∗teḱʲtʲ- and treated it as the underlying root.¹⁵ Indo-Iranian treated the
form as the zero grade of the root and created a new full-grade ∗tḗḱʲtʲ- by adding
another ∗e, which of course contracted with the one already present (see 2.2.4 (i));
hence 3pl. ∗téḱʲtʲn̥ ti > Skt tákṣati but 3sg. ∗tḗḱʲtʲ-s-ti > tā́ ṣṭi ‘(s)he fashions’. Only
Gk τίκτει ‘she’s giving birth’ preserves the original reduplicated present, and it
has been remodeled in ways typical of Greek: the reduplicating vowel has been
replaced by ∗i, and a thematic stem has been constructed on the old zero grade of
the athematic stem (thus ∗téteḱ- ~ ∗tétḱ- > ∗tétek- ~ ∗tétʲkʲ- (with merger of palatals
and velars and thorn-cluster palatalization) → ∗títek- ~ ∗tíkʲtʲ- (with replacement
of the reduplicating vowel and metathesis) > ∗títek- ~ ∗tíkt- → τικτ-ε- ~ τικτ-ο-).
Clusters of obstruents undergo rules of voicing assimilation in all the daugh-
ters, but since most such rules are natural and could have arisen repeatedly, it
¹⁵ Latin apparently added the thematic vowel (∗téḱʲtʲ-e-ti > texit ‘she weaves’)—if the Latin verb
belongs here; for an alternative, see Rix et al. (2001) s.v. 2. ∗tek.


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
2.2 PIE PHONOLOGY 19
is unclear whether they should be reconstructed for PIE. The most interesting
example is ‘Bartholomae’s Law’, an Indo-Iranian rule by which breathy-voicing
spreads rightward through a cluster of obstruents; for instance, in Sanskrit the
addition of the past participial suffix /-tá-/ (< PIE verbal adjective ∗-tó-, see above)
to the root /budʰ-/ ‘awaken’ (< PIE ∗bʰewdʰ-; Sanskrit roots are traditionally
cited in the zero grade) gives buddʰá-‘awake’. It is possible, but not certain, that
the rule was inherited from PIE. Given the uncertainty surrounding the prehis-
tory of these assimilation rules, I write unassimilated forms for PIE (∗yugtós,
etc.).
Various simplifications of consonant clusters occurred in PIE. It’s clear that
∗KsK clusters were simplified by loss of the first stop; for instance, the present
of ∗preḱ- ‘ask’ (cf. Lat. precēs ‘prayers’), underlyingly ∗/pr̥ ḱ-sḱé/ó-/, surfaced as
∗ pr̥ sḱé-ti ‘(s)he keeps asking’ (cf. Lat. poscit ‘(s)he asks for’, Skt pr̥ ccʰáti ‘she asks’).
Some word-initial clusters of stops were simplified before some sonorants (syllabic
or not); obvious examples are ∗ḱm̥ tóm ‘hundred’, evidently derived from ∗/déḱm̥ t/
‘ten’ but lacking the initial ∗d-, and ∗ǵʰm- ~ ∗ǵʰm̥ -, the zero-grade alternant of
‘earth’ (see above). Further details are beyond the scope of this sketch.
2.2.4 (iv) Auslautgesetze
It is likely that word-final ∗/t/ was voiced when a vowel or sonorant preceded (Hale
1994, Ringe 1997); thus the surface form of ‘ten’, cited immediately above, was
probably ∗déḱm̥ d. This relatively unnatural rule still operated in Hittite and in
Proto-Italic, and it is more likely that that reflects a common inheritance than a
parallel innovation.¹⁶
The morphologized effects of some pre-PIE phonological rules affecting word-
final sequences had a major impact on PIE nominal inflection. The most impor-
tant of these rules is ‘Szemerényi’s Law’, by which the word-final sequences ∗∗-VRs
and ∗∗-VRh₂ (at least) became ∗-V:R (where R symbolizes a nonvocalic sonorant,
V a vowel, and : vowel length). These rules affected the nom. sg. forms of numer-
ous masculine and feminine nouns, and the nom.-acc. of neuter collectives; for
instance, ∗∗ph₂tér-s ‘father’ > ∗ph₂tḗr (the reconstructable form). A word-final ∗ -n
that arose by this process was subsequently dropped, at least if the preceding seg-
ment was (unaccented) ∗ō (cf. Jasanoff 2002: 34–5); thus ∗∗tétḱons ‘craftsman’ >
∗∗tétḱōn > ∗∗tétḱō > ∗téḱʲtʲō. We know that these rules had already been mor-
phologized in PIE because (a) the resulting long vowel had begun to spread to
other nom. sg. forms in which it was not phonologically justified (e.g. ∗pṓds ‘foot’),
and (b) word-final sonorants other than ∗-n were sometimes dropped in nom. sg.
¹⁶ This has been adumbrated repeatedly in the literature; see e.g. Schwyzer (1939: 409), Szemerényi
(1973: 60–1). If the first component of the Latin compound atavos ‘great-great-great-grandfather’ is
identical with the adverb ∗ád (as suggested by Alan Nussbaum, p.c. to Michael Weiss), it is a further
piece of supporting evidence. On the function of ∗ád, see 2.3.4 (i).


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
20 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
forms (only; e.g. ∗sókʷh₂ō ‘companion’ was an i-stem, and its nom. sg. ought to
have ended in ∗∗-oys, as George Cardona reminds me). For up-to-date discussion,
see Piwowarczyk (2015).
Also fairly important was a complex of rules called ‘Stang’s Law’, by which word-
final ∗/-Vmm/, ∗/-Vwm/, and apparently ∗/-Vh₂m/ surfaced as ∗-V:m, and ∗/Vyi/
became ∗V:y in final syllables; for instance, the acc. sg. of ∗dom- ‘house’ seems
to have been ∗dṓm instead of expected ‘∗dómm̥ ’, that of ∗dyew- ‘day, sky’ was
clearly ∗dyḗm instead of ‘∗dyéwm̥ ’, feminines in ∗-ah₂ had acc. sg. forms in ∗-ām,
and i-stem loc. sg. ∗/-ey-i/ became ∗-ēy. The same or similar rules appear to have
applied before acc. pl. ∗-ns, ultimately giving forms in ∗-V:s, but the details are not
completely clear.
In utterance-final position laryngeals were lost, at least if a syllabic immedi-
ately preceded. Such a sandhi rule is recoverable from various phenomena in the
Rigveda; in addition, vocatives were complete utterances, and it is clear that the
final laryngeal of stems in ∗-ah₂ was lost in the voc. sg. (cf. Kuiper 1947: 210–12,
1961: 18). This rule was ordered after the laryngeal-coloring rules, so that in the
vocatives in question the output was short ∗-a. This is the source of Greek voca-
tives in -τα to masc. ā-stems in -της (< -τᾱς ← ∗-τᾱ), of OCS vocatives in -o (< ∗-a)
to nouns in -a (< ∗-ā < ∗-ah₂ = ∗/-eh₂/), and of Umbrian vocatives in -a to nouns
in -o (< ∗-ā < ∗-ah₂).
2.2.5 PIE accent
A PIE word could contain at most one accented syllable. It seems clear that the
surface instantiation of accent was high pitch (as attested in Vedic Sanskrit and
Ancient Greek, both described by native grammarians), though in all the daugh-
ter languages this eventually evolved into prominence (‘stress’), and in many the
system was eventually lost.
The rules by which accent was assigned in PIE are still incompletely understood,
but the following facts are fairly clear. In principle any syllable of a word could be
accented. Thematic nominals (i.e. those ending in the thematic vowel; see 2.2.4 (i))
had the accent on the same syllable throughout the paradigm; thematic verb stems
also have fixed accent in the earliest attested languages and apparently did in PIE
as well. Some athematic verb stems and nominals exhibited fixed accent (mostly
on the root), but most exhibited alternating accent; there were several patterns,
but in all of them the surface accent was to the left in one group of forms (the
nominative and accusative cases of nominals, the active singular of verbs) and to
the right in the rest. It seems clear that stems and endings could be underlyingly
accented or not, that the leftmost underlying accent surfaced, and that words with
no underlying accent were assigned accent on the leftmost syllable by default; but
not all the details have been worked out satisfactorily.


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 21
There was a class of small particles, pronouns, and the like, called ‘clitics’,
that never bore an accent. Much more surprisingly, there were rules applying in
sentential contexts—therefore on the phrase level, at the end of the phonology—
that deaccented major words. Vocatives were normally deaccented; so were finite
verb forms in main clauses, though not in subordinate clauses. When such forms
occurred sentence-initially, however, they were accented after all. Sentence-initial
vocatives clearly received accent on their leftmost syllables by default. Sentence-
initial finite verbs in main clauses apparently received whatever accent they would
have borne in subordinate clauses—at least to judge from Vedic Sanskrit, the only
daughter that preserves the inherited system more or less intact.
This complex and unusual accent system partly survives in Greek, though it has
undergone extensive modifications.
2.3 PIE inflectional morphology
Core IE clearly had a large and complex inflectional system. Most of its inflectional
morphology is preserved in Indo-Iranian; its nominal inflection is reasonably well
preserved in Balto-Slavic and its verb inflection in Greek, and substantial parts
of the system survive in other ancient and mediaeval IE languages, especially in
Latin. The morphological history of Core IE languages is characterized for the
most part by gradual loss of categories and inflectional classes among nominals
and both loss and renewal in verb inflection.
PIE also possessed a fairly large and complex inflectional system, but compari-
son of the Anatolian languages with Core IE suggests that the development from
PIE to Core IE involved some increase in inflectional complexity with little loss.
(The Tocharian languages have lost much of the PIE system of nominal inflection,
which limits their usefulness in assessing the PIE situation.)
Since the development of PIE into Core IE is a subject of ongoing discussion
and the reconstruction of the PIE inflectional system is uncertain in many points,
my treatment of those earliest stages in the prehistory of Greek will be fairly brief.
I will then lay out the Core IE system in greater detail and use it as the starting
point for the separate development of Greek.
2.3.1 PIE inflectional categories
The classes of inflected lexemes in PIE included verbs, nouns, adjectives, pro-
nouns, determiners, and most quantifiers. All except verbs were inflected accord-
ing to a single system and are therefore grouped together as ‘nominals’; verb
inflection was considerably more complex than nominal inflection.


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
22 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
All nominals were inflected for number and case. Singular, dual, and plural were
distinguished, the dual expressing ‘two’. Comparison of IE languages attested early
suggests that PIE nominals were inflected for nine cases, as follows.
case functions (not lexically governed)
vocative direct address
nominative subject of finite verb; complement of ‘be’, etc.
accusative (default) direct object of verb; extent, duration
dative indirect object; benefactive; possession (at least as predicate of
‘be’); purpose
genitive complement of noun phrase: possession, partitive, measure
instrumental instrument; accompaniment
ablative motion from; separation
locative location, time at or within which
allative motion to or toward
The allative survives as such only in Old Hittite, but since a few Greek adverbs
appear to be fossilized allatives, the case should be reconstructed for PIE. For
instance, Homeric Gk χαμαί ‘to the ground’ evidently reflects the PIE allative
∗ǵʰmáh₂ ~ ∗ǵʰm̥ áh₂ (by Lindeman’s Law) to which the ‘hic-et-nunc’ particle ∗-i
has been suffixed; the caseform survives in its original function in Old Hitt. taknā,
whose stem has been remodeled. In Core IE the allative apparently underwent syn-
tactic merger with the accusative.¹⁷ The ablative case poses a different and more
intractable kind of problem which will be discussed at length below.
Each noun was arbitrarily assigned to a concord class, called a ‘gender’. In
Nuclear IE there were three genders, conventionally called masculine, feminine,
and neuter. Whether the feminine gender was already present in PIE continues to
be debated; see Melchert (2014b) for a summary of the debate with numerous ref-
erences and Kim (2014) for a recent proposal regarding the origin of the feminine.
Anatolian has no feminine gender, and possible relics of an original feminine in the
Anatolian languages are sparse and equivocal (see Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 64
with references); possible instances of feminine concord are especially uncertain
(Melchert 2014b: 259 with references). The existence of a class of Lycian animate
nouns in -a < ∗-ah₂ that indicate females (lada ‘wife’, kbatra ‘daughter’, and pos-
sibly xawa ‘sheep’, wawa ‘cow’; see Melchert 1994b: 231) suggests that ∗-h₂ might
have marked feminine nouns in PIE, but some other such nouns indicate males
(Melchert 2014b: 261–2 with references), and many archaic Nuclear IE languages
exhibit, in addition to numerous feminines in ∗-ah₂ and ∗-ih₂ ~ ∗-yáh₂-, stems in
¹⁷ As Craig Melchert reminds me, the accusative is also occasionally used for motion to or toward
in Old Hittite (Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 248–9), which suggests that it already had that function
in PIE; whether there was any functional difference between the two in Old Hittite (or in PIE) is not
clear. But the existence of such a fossil as Gk χαμαί seems to me to force the reconstruction of an allative
case for the protolanguage.


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 23
∗-ah₂ that are masculine. The suffix ∗-ser- is an archaic inflectional marker of femi-
nine gender in the Core IE numerals ‘three’ and ‘four’ (see 2.3.6 (i)) and must have
been inherited from the proximate ancestor of Core IE, but in Anatolian it is a suf-
fix which derives nouns denoting females (Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 59), which
suggests that it was still derivational in PIE. The most likely relic of a feminine
gender in Anatolian is perhaps Hittite sia-‘one’, which can have been backformed
to the feminine reconstructable for Core IE (see 2.3.6 (i)).
Since adjectives, determiners, and most quantifiers modifying a noun exhibited
gender concord with the noun, and concord of number, case, and gender obtained
under coreference (see 2.5), nominals other than nouns normally had parallel sets
of case-and-number forms, one for each gender. Only in the personal pronouns
was gender concord not expressed in the inflectional morphology.
Since there was also concord of person and number (but not gender) between
a finite verb and its subject (see 2.5), finite forms of verbs were inflected for three
persons and three numbers. Since PIE was a ‘null subject’ language, the subject
was expressed only by the concord marking on the verb in very many clauses, and
the hearer was obliged to recover its person and number from the inflection of the
verb.
The category of aspect was important in PIE verb inflection, but it appears that
aspect was expressed by derivational rather than inflectional morphology, much
as in modern Russian (though the Russian system is a much later, purely Slavic
creation). In the Anatolian languages aspect is still expressed derivationally; for a
good description of the Hittite system, see Hoffner and Melchert (2008: 317–23).
The PIE system was based on an opposition between perfective and imperfective
stems; apparently most basic verbs were inherently perfective or imperfective—
unlike the attested Hittite situation, in which most basic verbs are ‘neutral’ with
respect to aspect—but a verb of either aspect could be derived from a basic verb
of the other. A perfective stem denoted an event without reference to its internal
structure, if any. The event might in fact have been complex, or repeated, or habit-
ual, or taken a long time to complete; but by using a perfective verb the speaker
indicated no interest in (or perhaps knowledge of ) those details (cf. Comrie 1976).
Since reference to present time includes the time of speaking, which imposes inter-
nal structure on the event, a perfective stem could not refer to present time; if it
had a ‘present tense’, that tense would necessarily refer to something other than
the actual present (e.g. the immediate future, or actions performed habitually).
Though it is not usually remarked, many Modern English verbs actually exhibit
this characteristic; we say, ‘Tomorrow I go on vacation’, or ‘I go to the beach once
a year’, but if we are talking about the actual present we must use an explicitly
imperfective form of ‘go’: ‘Vacation is over, so I am going home’. A PIE imperfec-
tive verb did focus on the internal structure of an event; the event could extend
over time during which something else happened, be repeated, be habitual, be
attempted but not completed, be an action performed independently by several


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
24 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
subjects or separately upon several objects, and so on. Stative verbs, which indi-
cate a state rather than an action, are a special type of imperfective; there were
certainly derived statives in PIE, but basic statives do not seem to have had any
special morphological characteristics.¹⁸
The Nuclear IE languages (i.e. the non-Anatolian half of the family) eventually
reorganized the PIE derivational aspect system into a tighter inflectional system,
in which a single verb could have two or three stems indicating different aspects.
The perfective stem in this inflectional system is traditionally called the ‘aorist’;
reconstructable examples (cited in 3sg. subject form) include ∗bʰúHt ‘it became’,
∗ gʷémd ‘(s)he took a step’, ∗luktó ‘it got light’, ∗ mr ̥tó ‘(s)he disappeared/died’,
∗wḗǵʰst ‘(s)he transported (it)’, ∗wéwked ‘(s)he said’, etc. The imperfective stem
is traditionally (but rather unfortunately) called the ‘present’, even though there
were both present and past tenses made from it; reconstructable examples include
∗ gʷm ̥sḱéti ‘(s)he’s walking’ (i.e. taking repeated steps), ∗ǵn ̥h₃sḱéti ‘(s)he recog-
nizes (habitually)’, ∗h₂áǵeti ‘(s)he’s driving (them)’, ∗bʰinédst ‘(s)he tried to split
(it)’,¹⁹ ∗bʰoréyeti ‘(s)he’s carrying (it) around’, ∗spéḱyed ‘(s)he kept looking at (it)’,
etc. Many ‘present’ stems were stative in meaning, e.g. ∗h₁ésti ‘(s)he is’, ∗ gʷíh₃weti
‘(s)he’s alive’, ∗ḱéyor ‘it’s lying flat’, ∗wéstor ‘(s)he’s wearing’. But in the Nuclear IE
aspect system there was also a third type of stem with exclusively stative mean-
ing,²⁰ most unfortunately called the ‘perfect’; typical examples include ∗wóyde
‘(s)he knows’, ∗dedwóye ‘(s)he’s afraid’, ∗stestóh₂a ‘(s)he’s standing upright’, etc.
While it is often clear which classes of Anatolian verbs correspond to Nuclear IE
‘presents’ (imperfectives) and ‘aorists’ (perfectives), the origin of the Nuclear IE
‘perfect’ (stative) is a problem that we will need to discuss in more detail.
PIE verbs clearly had two ‘moods’, indicative and imperative; the latter
expressed commands. There were two indicative ‘tenses’, present and past. Nuclear
IE, at least, had two further moods, ‘subjunctive’ and ‘optative’; the subjunctive
was used to make statements that the speaker wished to regard as less than fully
¹⁸ I remain unconvinced by the assessment of the Homeric evidence suggested by Hollenbaugh
(2018). Of course it is true that Homer uses imperfects in narrative, sometimes when aorists might
be expected; but the formulaic nature of the Homeric oral tradition, in which formulas must be mod-
ified for use in different contexts, could easily have led to many such cases, and it is even possible that
the oral poets eventually derived a blanket ‘license’ to the effect that imperfects in place of aorists (but
not vice versa) were permissible.
¹⁹ To judge from the aspect system of Ancient Greek, imperfective verb forms could express
attempted but not completed actions. See Comrie (1976) for discussion.
²⁰ Many treatments of the PIE perfect suggest that it expressed states resulting from prior actions; a
typical exposition of this ‘stative-resultative’ hypothesis is Szemerényi (1996: 293). (See the extensive
discussion of Randall and Jones (2015: 141–5; with references), to whom I owe the term just used.)
But so far as I can see, any ‘resultative’ nuance of meaning can be lexical rather than grammatical. A
perfect meaning ‘be broken’ derived from a change-of-state verb such as ‘break’ cannot avoid implying
a prior action; a perfect meaning ‘know’ or ‘remember’ is much less likely to have any such implication.
Only if we can show that particular perfects developed from pure statives to stative-resultatives do we
have good evidence for a grammatical category expressing the latter—assuming that it can be shown to
differ from the ‘résultatif ’ of Chantraine (1927). For further discussion of the Indo-Iranian and Greek
evidence, see now Ku¨mmel (2020) and Ringe (2022).


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 25
realized or certain, including (importantly) future events, while the optative was
used to express the wishes of the speaker and potential events. Whether the sub-
junctive and/or optative should be reconstructed for PIE has long been debated,
as they are absent from the Anatolian verb system, but in 2.3.3 (i) I will argue
that PIE is likely to have had a subjunctive mood.²¹ In any case, since neither of
those moods marked tense, the expression of tense was confined to the indicative
and was a subordinate detail of the Nuclear IE verb system. PIE also had partici-
ples, which were adjectives but could be used to express subordinate clauses as
nominalizations; the participial suffixes were attached to aspect stems.
The final morphosyntactic category of the verb was ‘voice’. The unmarked voice
was the active. The ‘mediopassive’ voice was used (1) to mark the verb of a passive
clause; (2) to mark reflexives and reciprocals;²² and (3) in certain lexically marked
verbs, which are called ‘deponent verbs’. The Nuclear IE perfect (i.e. stative) had
no mediopassive voice, to judge from the following distributional facts. In Tochar-
ian the only direct reflex of the perfect is the preterite participle; it is indifferent
to voice, being used both actively and passively. In Latin and Gothic, where the
mediopassive has become largely or entirely passive in meaning, the reflexes of the
perfect have no passive forms, which are supplied by phrases; Latin does not even
have any (non-periphrastic) deponent perfects. Only in Greek and Indo-Iranian
are mediopassive perfects clearly attested, and while the formations are similar in
exhibiting reduplication but no suffix, they can easily be parallel innovations.²³
2.3.2 Formal expression of inflectional categories
In nominals, number and case were expressed by ‘fused’ endings in which no
separate markers of number on the one hand and case on the other could be
²¹ Jasanoff (2003a: 182–4) argues that three Hittite 2sg. imperative forms in -si reflect haplologized
subjunctives in ∗-s-e-si. Some facts from other IE languages suggest as much: Cardona (1965) estab-
lished that Vedic ‘imperatives’ in -si actually are subjunctives, since they are occasionally used in
subordinate clauses; Szemerényi (1966b) suggested haplology as the source of such forms; Jasanoff
(1986) identified similar forms in Old Irish, where they are amenable to Szemerényi’s explanation; and
Jasanoff (1987) argued for the existence of such a form in Tocharian. On the other hand, the pattern of
attestation of indisputable subjunctives in ∗ -e- ~ ∗-o- suggests that they are Nuclear IE innovations. In
Tocharian they are still in competition with an apparently older formation (see the discussion in 2.3.3
(i) with references), examples made directly to roots are fairly few, and the subjunctive vowel replaces
a stem-final thematic vowel (cf. Ringe 2000: 131–6); only in Core IE is the ‘classical’ IE subjunctive in
place. It seems prudent not to dismiss the possibility that the Hittite 2sg. imperatives in -si, and possibly
Toch. B pa¨klyauṣ, A pa¨klyoṣ ‘hear!’ as well, are of different origin.
²² In Hittite the reflexives and reciprocals marked by mediopassive verbs are direct (Hoffner and
Melchert 2008: 303), though most are accompanied by the innovative particle -z(a). In Indo-Iranian
and Greek, which have overt reflexive pronouns, they are usually ‘indirect’ reflexives, in which the
subject is implied to perform the action of the verb for his or her own benefit. It seems likely that
the Hittite situation is original, given that the reflexive pronouns of Core IE languages seem to have
developed from a PIE 3rd-person pronoun (see 2.3.6 (iii)).
²³ A tiny handful of Old Irish deponent suffixless preterites resemble the Indo-Iranian and Greek
mediopassive perfects (Jasanoff 2003a: 31, 44), but since they are made to verbs with deponent presents
they can easily be innovations.


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
26 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
distinguished; for instance, gen. sg. ∗-és ~ ∗ -os ~ ∗-s and gen. pl. ∗-óHom shared
no distinguishable marker of the case ‘genitive’, and neither exhibited any distin-
guishable marker of number (cf. e.g. nom. pl. ∗-es, dat. pl. ∗-os, loc. pl. ∗-sú, etc.; it is
reasonable to suppose that the singular was unmarked for number). In those nomi-
nals that expressed gender (i.e. all except nouns and personal pronouns), feminine
gender was normally expressed in Nuclear IE by a suffix which followed all deriva-
tional suffixes but preceded the case-and-number endings. Neuter gender was
distinguished from masculine (and, in nouns, feminine) only in the nominative,
accusative, and vocative cases, in which it exhibited different case-and-number
endings; thus in those cases the endings expressed gender as well. This organiza-
tion of nominal inflection persisted far down into the individual histories of the
attested daughter languages.
In PIE the inflection of verbs seems to have been similar: tense, the imperative
mood, voice, and the person and number of the subject were all marked by a single
set of fused polyfunctional morphemes called simply ‘endings’ because they were
the final element of a (finite) verb form. The participial suffixes occupied the same
position as the finite verb endings. In the Anatolian languages this system persisted
without change. In Nuclear IE, however, many of the affixes used to derive verbs
from one another in PIE became markers of aspect, eventually adding a new layer
to the inflectional template of verbs. In addition, subjunctive and optative moods
were marked by suffixes added to the aspect stem but preceding the endings, so
that the structure of an inflected verb became root (+ aspect affix) (+ mood suffix)
+ ending, and the participial suffixes now occupied the same position as the mood
suffixes.
Some daughters of Central IE also evolved a prefix ∗é-, called the ‘augment’,
that marked past tense (in the indicative only). In those daughters there was a
three-way opposition in the indicative of the present and aorist stems: (1) forms
with primary endings, which marked them for present tense (only in the imper-
fective, for the reasons given above); (2) forms with secondary endings and the
augment, which marked them for past tense; (3) forms with secondary endings
but no augment, called ‘injunctives’, which were apparently unmarked for tense
and were used where tense could be inferred from context (see especially Hoff-
mann 1967a). The augment is clearly attested in Greek, Phrygian, Armenian, and
Indo-Iranian. In Greek it not only marks past tense forms but is also affixed to
the ‘gnomic aorist’, which makes statements that are asserted to be always true.
From this odd pattern of facts Delfs (2006) argued convincingly that the augment
was originally an evidential particle, citing parallels from Wintun languages; De
Decker (2018: 24–9) cautiously suggests a similar conclusion on the basis of the
distribution of augmented forms in the Homeric poems. The fact that it still has
two disjunct functions in Greek—past tense and gnomic aorist—suggests that its
incorporation into verb inflection was recent enough that its original evidential
function had not yet been lost. Since it cannot be reconstructed as an inflectional


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 27
affix even for Central IE with any confidence, I will discuss the augment in the
context of the individual development of Greek.
2.3.3 PIE verb inflection
This section will sketch those parts of the verb system reconstructable for PIE and
describe in detail the verb system that can be reconstructed for Core IE. Since the
latter is essentially the Indo-Greek verb, further information can be found in the
handbooks cited at the end of 2.1 and in Rix et al. (2001) (though my reconstruc-
tions differ from theirs in various details, generally accepting fewer innovative
hypotheses than those of Rix et al.). For alternative reconstructions, see Jasanoff
(2003a), Mottausch (2003).
2.3.3 (i) Verb stems: From derivation to inflection
PIE verb stems expressed aspect and some other categories. They fell into two
purely formal classes, called ‘athematic’ and ‘thematic’. The latter ended in the the-
matic vowel ∗ -e- ~ ∗-o- (see 2.2.4 (i)); the former apparently always ended in a
non-syllabic. Some stems were affixless, while others were marked by one of a wide
variety of affixes. PIE stem-forming affixes were part of the derivational morphol-
ogy; in Nuclear IE many, but not all, eventually became inflectional markers of
aspect.
Comparison of Nuclear IE aspect-marking affixes with Anatolian derivational
affixes enables us to infer the PIE system and make further inferences about its
development in the daughters. The following equations of suffixes and an infix
seem straightforward:
Hittite Nuclear IE
affix function affix function
-ni(n)-(infix) causative ∗-né- ~ ∗ -n-(infix) present (= imperfective)
-nu-causative, factitive ∗-néw- ~ ∗ -nu-present
-ske/a-imperfective ∗-sḱé/ó-present
-ahh-factitive ∗-(a)h₂-factitive present
-āi- < ∗-ah₂-yé- denominative ∗-yé/ó-denominative present
-e-stative, fientive ∗-éh₁-stative, fientive
It is striking that while the affixes have different functions in Hittite, they are
almost all used to derive present (i.e. imperfective) stems in Nuclear IE; only ∗-éh₁-
appears also in aorist (i.e. perfective) stems, namely in the Greek intransitive aorist
in -ή-, which will be discussed in detail in the appropriate place below. One fac-
titive present derived from a u-stem adjective actually survives in Nuclear IE: Skt
ā́ dabʰnoti ‘(s)he damages’ < ∗d(ʰ)ebʰ-né-w-ti is clearly cognate with Hitt. tepnuzzi


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
28 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
‘(s)he makes (it) small(er)’, derived from tēpus ‘small’. A few other Sanskrit exam-
ples, such as inóti ‘(s)he lets go, (s)he drives’, derived from i-‘go’, show that the tran-
sitivizing function of the first two Hittite affixes was their original function even
in Nuclear IE; so does Gk κριμνάντων ‘while weighing (anchor)’ (Pindar Pythian
IV.25) beside ἐκρέμω ‘you were hanging’ (Il. 15.18, 21), Att. intr. κρέμασθαι. How
these affixes came to be imperfectivizing in Nuclear IE is not clear. The last three
affixes in the table are still derivational in many Nuclear IE languages, but the first
three have become inflectional markers of the imperfective aspect.
In addition, the cognates of several imperfective aspect markers of Nuclear
IE appear fossilized in various Anatolian verb stems. Reduplicated stems are not
uncommon; for instance, Hitt. mimmai ‘(s)he refuses’ (< ∗(s)he hesitates’) appears
to be cognate with Gk μίμνει ‘(s)he’s waiting’ < ∗mi-mn-e/o-, while the stem of
Hitt. sissandu ‘let them seal (it)’ is cognate with that of Lat. serit ‘(s)he sows’,
both < ∗si-sh₁-e/o- ‘press (things) in (one after another)’. Two Nuclear IE derived
causative presents appear to have Hittite cognates: Hitt. lukkizzi ‘(s)he sets fire to’
= Skt rocáyati ‘(s)he makes (it) give light’ < PIE ∗lowkéyeti; Hitt. wassezzi ‘(s)he
clothes’ = Skt vāsáyati < PIE ∗woséyeti. Stems in ∗-ye/o- corresponding to Nuclear
IE presents are also represented; for instance, Hitt. weriyezzi ‘(s)he calls’ = Ionic
Gk ἐ̄́ ρει ‘(s)he says’ < PIE ∗wéryeti, and Hitt. sākizzi ‘(s)he gives a sign’ = Lat. sāgit
‘(s)he senses keenly’²⁴ < PIE ∗sah₂giéti. (For possible Hittite and Luvian survivals
of the imperfectivizing function of ∗-ye/o-, see Melchert 1997b.)
The only widespread perfective aspect marker in Nuclear IE was ∗-s-, the suf-
fix of the ‘sigmatic’ aorist. Whether any Anatolian verb stems exhibit a cognate
of that affix is disputed, but several plausible examples can be cited: Hitt. ganess-
‘recognize’ appears to be cognate with the stem of Toch. A kñasu ‘I recognized’,
kñas-a¨ṣt ‘you recognized’ < PIE ∗ǵnēh₃-s- (Schmidt and Winter 1992: 51–2, Hack-
stein 1993: 151–6); Hitt. u-lesta ‘(s)he hid him/herself ’ seems to be more or less
identical with Skt ní aleṣṭa ‘(s)he has hidden him/herself ’ < ∗ley-s-; Hitt. karszi
‘(s)he cuts’ might be a stem-cognate of Gk ἔκερσε ‘(s)he sheared’, Hitt. pāsi ‘(s)he
swallows’ is conceivably a stem-cognate of Skt ápās ‘(s)he has drunk’, and so on.
The relation of the Hittite ‘hi-conjugation’ to the Nuclear IE perfect is much
less clear. Hittite active verbs fall into two arbitrary inflectional classes with dif-
ferent endings in the singular, called ‘mi-conjugation’ and ‘hi-conjugation’ after
their present 1sg. endings. The endings of the mi-conjugation are for the most
part clearly cognate with those of the Nuclear IE present and aorist stems. The
hi-conjugation resembles the Nuclear IE perfect (i.e. stative), but it is the past
tense endings of the hi-conjugation that are cognate with the Nuclear IE perfect
indicative endings. Many scholars reconstruct the perfect for PIE; it is suggested
that it survived as the Anatolian hi-conjugation past, and that a present tense was
²⁴ Actually attested are Hom. εἴρω ‘I say’ and Lat. infinitive sāgīre, quoted in the meaning ‘sentīre
acūtē’ (Cicero, De divinatione I.65).


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 29
backformed from it. But unlike the perfect, the hi-conjugation is not stative in
meaning, and stem-cognations between Hittite hi-conjugation verbs and Nuclear
IE perfects are few and scattered. Numerous other difficulties with the hypothesis
that the perfect gave rise to the hi-conjugation are discussed in Jasanoff (2003a:
7–17), and in my opinion the hypothesis does not survive Jasanoff ’s examina-
tion of it. The alternative is to reconstruct something like the hi-conjugation for
PIE. Jasanoff (2003a) reconstructs a very complex verb system for PIE, including
‘h₂e-conjugation’ presents (i.e. imperfectives) and aorists (perfectives) as well as a
perfect and pluperfect, but his reconstruction does not offer a convincing expla-
nation for the pattern of facts just rehearsed. Moreover, he effectively projects the
Hittite system of two isofunctional and lexically arbitrary conjugations back into
PIE; and while we might settle for such a reconstruction if necessary, we should
first try to figure out what the original function of the h₂e-paradigm could have
been (cf. Willi 2018: 51).
Surprisingly, two other Core IE categories have a hi-conjugation ending: the
active 1sg. of thematic present stems and the active 1sg. of subjunctives. We should
expect the ending in the present, at least, to be ∗-o-mi, and that is in fact the source
of Hitt. thematic pres. 1sg. -a-mi; but in Nuclear IE we find ∗-o-h₂ instead, in
which ∗-h₂ is the zero grade of perfect 1sg. ∗-h₂a, as expected after the thematic
vowel. The fact that the same ending shows up in the Nuclear IE thematic present
tense and the Hittite hi-conjugation past strongly suggests that the PIE ancestor of
the hi-conjugation also did not mark tense—though in most other ways it did not
resemble the Nuclear IE perfect.
Some other peculiarities of the Nuclear IE subjunctive might point in the same
direction. Tocharian languages have a separate subjunctive stem, and while a few
Tocharian subjunctives appear to be cognate with Core IE subjunctives (Ringe
2000: 131–4), many others cannot be. Among the latter are subjunctives of classes
I and V, which must be reconstructed with (post-)PIE ∗o in the active singular
and ∗e or zero in other forms (Jasanoff 2003a: 161–3 with references). Kim has
therefore suggested that those subjunctives, the Nuclear IE perfect, and the hi-
conjugation all share an origin in a class of perfective presents (Kim 2007: 188–9,
193–7). But the Tocharian subjunctive is not perfective in any of its uses (Peyrot
2013: 190–3), and the Nuclear IE perfect was a stative imperfective, not necessarily
implying any prior action (Ku¨mmel 2020, Ringe 2022).
An obvious alternative is that the PIE h₂e-conjugation was actually a subjunc-
tive, which did not mark tense because it did not primarily refer to present or past
events (Ringe 2012). That is congruent with another oddity of the Core IE sub-
junctive. In Indo-Iranian, and to a lesser extent in Greek, the subjunctive is found
with both primary and secondary endings. It is sometimes suggested that the Core
IE subjunctive had both sets of endings with different functions; a clear exposition
of that hypothesis is Rix (1976a: 259–61). However, the distribution of endings in
Vedic suggests a different hypothesis. Not only the active 1sg., but also the 1du.


===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
30 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
and 1pl., have secondary endings, and given the use of the subjunctive in exhor-
tations, those are pivotal forms (unlike in the indicative) and likely to be old. The
active 3pl. also has a secondary ending, and the 2sg. and 3sg. exhibit both primary
and secondary endings. Only the more peripheral members of the paradigm—the
active 2pl., 2du., and 3du. and the mediopassive—always have primary endings
in Vedic. It seems reasonable to suggest that the subjunctive originally had sec-
ondary endings, which makes sense, since it did not refer to present time. The
primary endings of Indo-Iranian and Greek, as well as those of daughters attested
later—Italic, Tocharian, Armenian, and Celtic, as well as Germanic, in which a
few subjunctives became presents (Ringe 2017: 185–6; with references)—must be
parallel innovations.
The fact that 1sg. ∗-o-h₂ also appears in the Core IE thematic present indica-
tive, where it is the only secondary ending in the paradigm, prompts a further
inference: the Nuclear IE simple thematic present developed out of the ∗-e/o-
subjunctive.
The foregoing hypothesis can be summed up as follows. The PIE h₂e-paradigm
was the subjunctive and had no primary endings. In Anatolian it lost its modal
function, acquiring primary endings and becoming an arbitrary conjugation of
verbs. In Nuclear IE one class of h₂e-paradigms—probably a small and unimpor-
tant one—survived as the perfect, probably with substantial innovations. Other-
wise the system underwent a wholesale reorganization. Some other h₂e-paradigms
survived as subjunctives in Tocharian. Those that did not end in short vowels
became class I and V subjunctives; those that did²⁵ became subjunctives of the
type familiar from Core IE daughters. Some of the latter developed into simple
thematic present stems.²⁶ In the course of that development the stems ending in a
short vowel were remodeled so as to exhibit the same endings: all the 1sg. forms,
including the preexisting presents in ∗-sḱé/ó- and ∗-yé/ó-, wound up with an end-
ing ∗-o-h₂, but otherwise the preexisting thematic endings ‘won out’. Most of these
developments had at least begun in Nuclear IE, before Tocharian lost contact with
the other daughters.²⁷
For Core IE a coherent system of aspect stems is solidly reconstructable, as
described in the next few paragraphs.
Present (imperfective) stems exhibited the widest variety of affixes. Basic
presents included at least the following types.
²⁵ It is striking that while unsuffixed mi-verbs ending in etymologically short vowels are proba-
bly not attested in Hittite (Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 199, fn. 66), hi-verbs of that shape might be
(pp. 224–7).
²⁶ The connection between vowel-final hi-conjugation verbs and thematic presents goes back to
Watkins (1969: 107–8), though in the context of a very different reconstruction of the PIE verb.
²⁷ This narrative covers some of the same ground as Willi (2018: 197–9), though with different judg-
ments of the evidence; the most important difference is that I have made the subjunctive central to the
changes hypothesized instead of trying to derive it from a thematic present.


===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 31
Athematic presents:
• root-presents (i.e. affixless athematic presents), e.g. ∗h₁és- ~ ∗h₁s- ‘be’ (cf.
Skt 3sg. ás-ti, 3pl. s-ánti), ∗h₁ḗd- ~ ∗h₁éd- ‘be eating’ (cf. Lat. 3sg. ēs-t, 3pl.
ed-unt);²⁸
• athematic presents reduplicated with ∗Ce-, e.g. ∗dʰé-dʰeh₁- ~ ∗dʰé-dʰh₁-²⁹
‘be putting’ (cf. Skt 3sg. dádʰā-ti, 3pl. dádʰ-ati);
• athematic presents reduplicated with ∗Ci-, e.g. ∗stí-stah₂- ~ ∗stí-sth₂- ‘be
getting up (into a standing position)’ (cf. Gk 3sg. ἵστη-σι, 3pl. ἱστᾶσι <
∗hιστά-ᾱσι);
• nasal-infixed presents (with the infix ∗-né- ~ ∗-n-), e.g. ∗li-né-kʷ- ~ ∗li-n-kʷ-
‘be leaving behind’ (cf. Skt 3sg. riṇák-ti, 3pl. riñc-ánti), ∗tl̥-ná-h₂- ~ ∗tl̥-n-h₂-
‘be lifting’ (cf. OIr. 3sg. tlena-id ‘(s)he steals’);
• presents with suffix ∗-néw- ~ ∗-nw- (~ ∗-nu-), e.g. ∗tn̥ -néw- ~ ∗tn̥ -nw- ‘be
stretching’ (cf. Skt 3sg. tanó-ti, 3pl. tanv-ánti).
Thematic presents:
• simple (i.e. affixless) thematic presents, e.g. ∗bʰér-e/o- ‘carry’ (cf. 3sg. Skt
bʰára-ti, Gk φέρε-ι, etc.), ∗su(H)-é/ó- ‘push’ (?; cf. Skt 3sg. suváti ‘(s)he
impels’);³⁰
• thematic presents reduplicated with ∗Ci-, e.g. ∗sí-sd-e/o- ‘be sitting down’ (cf.
3sg. Gk ἵζε-ται, Lat. cōn-sīdi-t, etc.);
• presents in ∗-sḱé- ~ ∗-sḱó-, e.g. ∗ pr̥ -sḱé/ó- ‘keep asking’ (root ∗preḱ-; cf. 3sg.
Skt pr̥ ccʰá-ti, Lat. posci-t ‘(s)he asks for’);
• presents in ∗-yé- ~ ∗-yó-, e.g. ∗ wr̥ ǵ-yé/ó- ‘be working’ (cf. 3sg. Av. vərəziie-iti,
Goth. waúrkei-þ);
• presents in ∗ -ye- ~ ∗-yo- (with accent on the root), e.g. ∗ gʷʰédʰ-ye/o- ‘keep
asking for’ (cf. OIr. 3sg. guidi-d, OPers. ǰadiyā-miy ‘I pray’);
• presents in ∗ -se- ~ ∗ -so-, e.g. ∗h₂lék-se/o- ‘protect’ (cf. 3sg. Skt rákṣa-ti, Hom.
Gk ἀλέξε-ι; probably originally desiderative ∗‘want to protect’, see below).
²⁸ Many colleagues hold that athematic presents with ablaut ∗ē ~ ∗e, often called ‘Narten presents’,
are derived, typically from roots that also make root-aorists; for a comprehensive exposition of that
view, see Ku¨mmel (1998) and Melchert (2014a). On the other hand, at least some of the reconstructed
present–aorist pairs are questionable (see Ringe 2012).
²⁹ I remain unconvinced by the arguments of Lu¨hr (1984) that this type of present exhibited o-
grade of the root in the active singular. As I pointed out in Ringe (2001), of about fifty such presents
reconstructed in Rix et al. (2001) only one—Hitt. wewakki ‘(s)he demands’—is attested with both redu-
plication and an o-grade root. The distribution of palatals and velars in Skt reduplicated presents is not
reliable evidence, since a pattern of initial palatal in the reduplicating syllable and initial velar in the
root has been generalized. The second vowel of Old Saxon dedos ‘you (sg.) did’ can reflect OHG influ-
ence; on the origin of ∗ō in the OHG paradigm, see Ringe and Taylor (2014: 76). For my own (tentative)
suggestion about the origin of PGmc ∗dō- ‘make, do’, see Ringe (2012).
³⁰ The latter is perhaps the best example with an unaccented zero-grade root, but it is far from cer-
tain; the most plausible cognates, Hitt. suwezzi ‘(s)he banishes’ and OIr. im.soí ‘(s)he turns it’, can reflect
a present in ∗-yé/ó-. Skt syáti ‘(s)he ties’ appears to be cognate with Hitt. 3sg. ishāi, 3pl. ishiyanzi, but
Luv. 3pl. hishiyanti suggests that the Hittite verb might originally have been reduplicated, its initial ∗h-
lost by dissimilation (Melchert 1994a: 168 with references).


===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
32 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
Derived presents included at least the following types.
Athematic derived presents:
• factitives in ∗-h₂-, formed from adjectives, e.g. ∗néwa-h₂- ‘renew’ (cf. Lat.
novā-re; Gk νεᾶν ‘to plow a fallow field’) ← ∗néwo- ‘new’.
Thematic derived presents:
• transitives, including some causatives and iteratives, in ∗-éye- ~ ∗-éyo- (with
o-grade root), formed from basic verbs, e.g. ∗sod-éye/o- ‘seat (someone)’ (cf.
Skt 3sg. sādáya-ti) ← ∗sed- ‘sit down’, ∗bʰor-éye/o- ‘be carrying around’ (cf.
Gk 3sg. φορεῖ < ∗ pʰorée-i) ← ∗bʰer- ‘carry’;
• desideratives in ∗-(h₁)se- ~ ∗-(h₁)so-, with and without reduplication ∗Ci-,
formed from basic verbs, e.g. ∗wéyd-se/o- ‘want to see’ (cf. Lat. vīse-re ‘to
visit’) ← ∗weyd- ‘catch sight of ’, ∗ḱí-ḱl̥-h₁se/o- ‘try to conceal’ (cf. OIr. fut.
3sg. céla-id ‘(s)he will hide’ < ∗kexlāti-s ←< ∗kiklāse-ti) ← ∗ḱel- ‘hide’;
• desideratives in ∗-syé- ~ ∗-syó-, formed from basic verbs, e.g. ∗bʰuH-syé/ó-
‘want to become’ (cf. Lith. fut. 1sg. bū́ siu ‘I will be’, ptc. bū́ siąs; remodeled in
Skt fut. 3sg. bʰaviṣyá-ti);
• denominatives in ∗-yé- ~ ∗-yó-, formed from nominals, e.g. ∗h₁regʷes-yé/ó-
‘get dark’ ← ∗h₁régʷes- ‘darkness’ (cf. Skt 3sg. rajasyá-ti); ∗somHe-yé/ó- ‘make
(things) the same’ (cf. Skt 3sg. samayá-ti ‘(s)he puts in order’) ← ∗somHó-
‘same’ (note the e-grade nominal stem vowel before the present-stem suffix);
• (?) factitives in ∗-yé- ~ ∗-yó-, formed from adjectives, e.g. ∗h₁lewdʰero-yé/ó-
‘make free’ (cf. Gk ἐλευθερõν < ∗eleutʰeróe-en) ← ∗h₁léwdʰero- ‘free’ (note
the o-grade vowel before the suffix).
Whether one inherited formation was present or aorist is uncertain (see
Harðarson 1998, but also 4.2.2 (iv)):
• statives/fientives in ∗-éh₁-, some formed from ‘Caland’ roots that partici-
pated in a wide range of derivational processes, e.g. ∗ph₂ǵ-éh₁- ‘be/become
fixed’ (cf. Gk παγῆναι), ∗h₁rudʰ-éh₁- ‘be/become red’ (cf. Lat. rubē-re ‘to
blush’) ← ∗h₁rewdʰ- ‘red’; perhaps also from derived adjectives, e.g. ∗sil-éh₁-
‘be/become silent’ (cf. Lat. silē-re ‘to be silent’, Goth. anasilan ‘to become
still’) ← ∗si-lo- ‘silent’.
There were far fewer types of aorists; the following are reconstructable.
Athematic aorists:
• root-aorists, e.g. ∗ gʷém- ~ ∗ gʷm- ‘step’ (cf. Skt gam-‘go’), ∗bʰuH- (∗bʰuh₂- ?)
‘become’ (cf. Skt bʰū-);


===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 33
• s-aorists, e.g. ∗dḗyḱ-s- ~ ∗déyḱ-s- ‘point out’ (cf. Gk δεῖξαι ‘to show’, Gāthā-Av.
2sg. dāiš ‘you showed’), ∗wḗǵʰ-s- ~ ∗wéǵʰ-s- ‘transport in a vehicle’ (cf. Lat.
vēx-isse ‘to have conveyed’).
Thematic aorists:
• simple thematic aorists, e.g. ∗h₁ludʰ-é/ó- ‘arrive’ (cf. 3sg. Hom. Gk ἤλυθε
‘(s)he came’, OIr. luid ‘(s)he went’, Toch. B lac ‘(s)he went out’);
• reduplicated thematic aorists, e.g. ∗wé-wk-e/o- ‘say’ (root ∗wekʷ-; cf. 3sg. Skt
á-voca-t, Hom. Gk ἔ-ειπε).
It appears that a majority of aorists were root-aorists in PIE. Only a modest number
of s-aorists are attested in as many as three subfamilies of IE. The simple thematic
aorist listed is the only one attested in three subfamilies; moreover, since Cardona
(1960) demonstrated that nearly all thematic aorists can be shown to be secondary
developments of root-aorists in the individual histories of the daughters, we must
reckon with the possibility that this one, too, was actually a root-aorist in PIE
(though the fact that it is attested as a relic—and thus comparatively archaic—
thematic preterite in Tocharian argues caution). About reduplicated thematic
aorists we are even less certain: the example listed is well attested in Indo-Iranian
and Greek, the two non-Anatolian daughters that preserve the greatest number
of archaisms in the verb system, but it is almost the only one not restricted to a
single daughter.³¹ There were even fewer types of perfect stems, all of which were
athematic; the following are reconstructable:
• root-perfects, e.g. ∗wóyd- ~ ∗wid- ‘know’ (cf. 3sg. Skt véda, Gk οἶδε, Goth.
wait);
• reduplicated perfects, e.g. ∗me-món- ~ ∗me-mn- ‘have in mind’ (cf. 3sg. Hom.
Gk μέμονε ‘(s)he desires’, Lat. meminit ‘(s)he remembers’, Goth. man ‘I think
so’).
The root-perfect listed is the only one reconstructable; so far as we can tell, all
other perfects were reduplicated.
Note that almost all reconstructable stems of Core IE derived verbs (factitives,
causatives, denominatives) were present (imperfective) stems. There must have
been a way of expressing the perfective aspect of those derived verbs in Core IE,
but we do not know what it was; probably it was a phrasal construction of some
sort.
³¹ Hom. ἤραρε ‘(s)he fit (it)’, ptc. ἀραρ ων´ is probably cognate with the Armenian aorist 3sg. arar
‘(s)he made’ (Bendahman 1993: 83), but the possibility that Greek and Armenian were especially close
to one another in prehistory makes this example even less probative than the other.


===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
34 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
A final point about the system sketched above should be emphasized. To judge
from developments in Greek—the attested daughter of Core IE which best pre-
served the inherited system of aspect stems—verb stem formation in Core IE
had not yet become inflectional. Very surprisingly, there are more than a few
‘crossovers’ between inherited perfective and imperfective stems in Greek (in both
directions); that is difficult to explain in a hard-and-fast inflectional system, but at
least somewhat easier if the system was still derivational. Specific examples will be
discussed in 4.2.1 and 4.2.2.
2.3.3 (ii) The Nuclear IE mood suffixes
PIE probably had no suffixes indicating mood. Nuclear IE clearly had subjunctive
and optative moods marked by suffixes that followed the aspect suffixes (if any) but
preceded the endings. The early development of the subjunctive has been outlined
in the preceding section; what remains to be said is that in Core IE the subjunctive
of thematic stems was made by suffixing the subjunctive vowel to the thematic
vowel, with contraction (see 2.2.4 (i)). The source of the optative is completely
unclear.
As might be expected, in Tocharian the optative is formed from the subjunc-
tive stem by further suffixation. But if the subjunctive stem ends in the thematic
vowel ∗ -e- ~ ∗-o-, that vowel is deleted before the optative suffix is added—unlike
in Central IE, where the final thematic vowel of an aspect stem is not deleted
before the optative suffix. Moreover, many Tocharian present stems and subjunc-
tive stems are identical, and it often appears that the subjunctive has been formed
from the present; but if the present stem is thematic, the stem-final thematic vowel
is deleted before the subjunctive thematic vowel is added—again unlike in Core
IE. The reconstructable situation seems to be as follows:
Tocharian Core IE
subjunctive: athematic ∗ -e- ~ ∗ -o-∗ -e- ~ ∗ -o-
thematic ∗ -e- ~ ∗ -o-∗-ē- ~ ∗ -ˉo- (see 2.2.4 (i))
optative: athematic ∗-yéh₁- ~ ∗-ih₁-∗-yéh₁- ~ ∗-ih₁-
thematic ∗-ih₁- (?) ∗-o-y(h₁)- (Central IE; see also
below)
Since we know that in nominal derivation the thematic vowel was deleted before
the suffix ∗-yó-, the deletion of the thematic vowel before the subjunctive and opta-
tive suffixes in Tocharian is plausibly an archaism, abandoned in the development
of Core IE.
In Central IE the stems listed in the preceding section constructed subjunctive
and optative stems as follows; I cite forms from some daughters (usually 3sg.) for
some of the stems.


===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 35
indicative/imperative subjunctive optative
∗h₁és- ~ ∗h₁s-∗h₁és-e/o- (cf. Skt ásati, ∗h₁s-iéh₁- ~ ∗h₁s-ih₁- (cf.
Lat. fut. erit) Skt syā́ t, Gk εἴη)
∗h₁ḗd- ~ ∗h₁éd-∗h₁éd-e/o- (cf. Skt ádat) ∗h₁éd-ih₁- (cf. Old Lat. 1sg.
edim)
∗dʰé-dʰeh₁- ~ ∗dʰé-dʰeh₁-e/o-∗dʰé-dʰh₁-ih₁- (cf. Skt
∗dʰé-dʰh₁-dádʰīta)
∗stí-stah₂- ~ ∗stí-sth₂-∗stí-stah₂-e/o-∗stí-sth₂-ih₁- (cf. Gk ἱσταίη)
∗li-né-kʷ- ~ ∗li-n-kʷ-∗li-né-kʷ-e/o- (cf. Skt ∗li-n-kʷ-iéh₁- ~ ∗li-n-kʷ-ih₁-
1du. riṇácāva)
∗tl̥-ná-h₂- ~ ∗tl̥-n-h₂-∗tl̥-ná-h₂-e/o-∗tl̥-n-h₂-iéh₁- ~ ∗tl̥-n-h₂-ih₁-
∗tn̥ -néw- ~ ∗tn̥ -nw-∗tn̥ -néw-e/o- (cf. Skt ∗tn̥ -nu-yéh₁- ~ ∗tn̥ -nw-ih₁-
1du. tanávāvahai)
∗bʰér-e/o-∗bʰér-ē/ˉo- (cf. Lat. fut. ∗bʰér-o-y(h₁)- (cf. Skt bʰáret,
feret) Gk φέροι)
∗ pr̥ -sḱé/ó-∗ pr̥ -sḱḗ/ṓ- (cf. Skt ∗ pr̥ -sḱó-y(h₁)-
pr̥ ccʰā́ t)
(etc.: all thematic stems formed the subjunctive by lengthening the thematic vowel
and the optative with ∗-y(h₁)-, which selected the o-grade of the thematic vowel)
∗h₁rudʰ-éh₁-∗h₁rudʰ-éh₁-e/o-∗h₁rudʰ-éh₁-ih₁- (?)
∗néwa-h₂-∗néwa-h₂-e/o-∗néwa-h₂-ih₁- (?)
∗ gʷém- ~ ∗ gʷm-∗ gʷém-e/o- (cf. Skt gámat) ∗ gʷm̥ -yéh₁- ~ ∗ gʷm-ih₁-
∗bʰuH-∗bʰúH-e/o- (cf. Skt bʰúvat) ∗bʰuH-yéh₁- ~ ∗bʰuH-ih₁-
(cf. Skt bʰuyaˉ ̄́t)
∗dḗyḱ-s- ~ ∗déyḱ-s-∗déyḱ-s-e/o-∗déyḱ-s-ih₁-
∗wóyd- ~ ∗wid-∗wéyd-e/o- (cf. Skt védati, ∗wid-yéh₁- ~ ∗wid-ih₁-
Hom. Gk 1pl. εἴδομεν) (cf. Skt vidyā́ t)
∗me-món- ~ ∗ me-mn-∗me-mén-e/o-∗ me-mn̥ -yéh₁- ~ ∗me-mn-ih₁-
(cf. Skt mamanyā́ t)
(Direct evidence for s-aorist optatives is sparse, though archaic-looking exam-
ples occur in Cretan Greek;³² direct evidence for modal forms made to derived
³² We might expect to find the s-aorist optative robustly attested in Indo-Iranian, but that is not
the case. Instead of active s-aorist optatives we find root-aorist optatives in Vedic (Hoffmann 1967b:
32), and a category called the precative seems to have been built on them (p. 32); middle s-aorist
optatives and precatives are rare and clearly innovative (Narten 1964: 43–5, 67–8). S-aorist optatives in
Avestan are also rare and often doubtful (Kellens 1984: 370, 372). The s-aorist itself clearly underwent
considerable expansion in Vedic, demonstrably inherited examples being few (Narten, op. cit.). Some
scholars have drawn the conclusion that the PIE s-aorist was rare and had no optative. But Indo-Iranian
is not a basal subgroup in the IE cladistic tree, and the presence of reflexes of s-aorists in Tocharian
and (probably) Hittite suggests that the s-aorist underwent a steep decline in Indo-Iranian followed by
a re-expansion. The only other daughter in which we might expect to find s-aorist optatives surviving
is Greek, in which they are an unproblematic part of the verb system. Further study of this question is
needed.


===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
36 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
athematic presents is even scantier.) As can be seen, the rules for the construction
of these secondary mood stems were straightforward. If the stem was athematic
and ablauting, the subjunctive was made by suffixing the thematic vowel to the
e-grade of the stem; if it was athematic but non-ablauting (like the derived sta-
tives and factitives, and ∗bʰuH- ‘become’), the thematic vowel was suffixed to the
invariant stem; if the stem was thematic, the subjunctive vowel contracted with
the stem-final thematic vowel, producing a long thematic vowel. Optatives were
made by suffixing ∗-yéh₁- ~ ∗-ih₁- to athematic stems (though if the accent fell
consistently to the left only the zero-grade of the optative suffix appeared); when
this suffix was added to thematic stems the thematic vowel of the stem appeared
in the o-grade and the suffix in the zero grade—with the result that the laryngeal
was dropped whenever a non-syllabic followed immediately (see 2.2.4 (i) ad fin.),
though it was apparently restored in the dialect ancestral to Balto-Slavic.³³
In the dialects ancestral to Italic and Celtic the system of mood suffixes was the
same, except that in place of the analyzable thematic optative complex ∗-o-y(h₁)-
there appeared an unanalyzable ∗-ā- of unknown origin (Trubetzkoy 1926, Ben-
veniste 1951, Jasanoff 1994).³⁴ It seems unlikely that this opaque suffix replaced the
transparent ∗-o-y(h₁)- of Central IE (as suggested by Jasanoff 1994: 204–5), but
replacement of the equally transparent Tocharian suffix seems almost as unlikely.
This is an unsolved problem.
2.3.3 (iii) Endings
The person/number/voice endings, including imperative endings, reconstructable
for PIE stems that did not follow the h₂e-paradigm are the following. (In general
I accept the reconstructions of Warren Cowgill; see also Sihler 1995: 453–80,
570–2.)
³³ See Olander (2015: 323, 337–8, 353). The alternative, namely that the laryngeal-drop rule oper-
ated early in the prehistories of most of the daughters but not in Balto-Slavic, seems moderately
less likely, considering the relatively close positions of Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian in the probable
post-PIE dialect map.
³⁴ It is true that the OIr. subjunctive suffix ∗-ā- could reflect earlier s-subjunctive ∗-ase-, which clearly
appears in British Celtic, by regular sound change (Rix 1977, McCone 1991: 85–113). But Jasanoff
(1994) argues strongly against that possibility on morphological grounds; in addition, he notes that
Middle Welsh 3sg. el ‘(s)he may go’, which is completely isolated in its paradigm, can reflect a preform
∗elāt but not ∗elaset (pp. 200, 205–7). There are also several probable Continental Celtic subjunctives
that appear to exhibit a suffix -ā-. Though the lexical meaning of Hispano-Celtic a´seCaTi is not cer-
tainly recoverable, it is probably a subjunctive, since it occurs in a context which appears to be a set of
prescriptions including also CaPiseTi and amPiTi´seTi, which must be either futures or s-subjunctives,
and a number of apparent third-person imperatives in -Tus (Eska 1989: 20–2); the Gaulish form axat,
in a healing charm quoted by Marcellus of Bordeaux (De medicamentis 8.171), is likewise probably a
subjunctive, since a modal form would be expected in a charm and this is the only form in the (very
short) charm that could be a verb. Gaulish lubijas (Lambert 2002: 131–2) is much less certain because
the context is fragmentary, but of the interpretations that have been proposed a 2sg. subjunctive still
seems the most plausible. I am grateful to Joseph Eska for calling to my attention the Continental Celtic
forms and Jasanoff (1994).


===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 37
active
primary secondary imperative displaced iptv.³⁵
1sg. ∗-m-i ∗ -m —
2sg. ∗-s-i ∗ -s 0, ∗-dʰí ∗-tṓd
3sg. ∗-t-i ∗-t (∗[-t ~ -d]) ∗-t-u (∗-t-ow?) ∗-tṓd
1du. ∗-wós ∗-wé —
2du. ∗-tés ∗-tóm ∗-tóm
3du. ∗-tés ∗-tā́ m ∗-tā́ m
1pl. ∗-mós ∗-mé —
2pl. ∗-té ∗-té ∗-té
3pl. ∗-ént-i ~ ∗-nt-i ∗-ént (∗[-énd]) ∗-ént-u ~ ∗-nt-u
~ ∗-nt (∗[-nd]) (∗-ént-ow ~ ∗-nt-ow?)
mediopassive
primary secondary imperative
1sg. ∗-h₂á-r ∗-h₂á —
2sg. ∗-th₂á-r ∗-th₂á ???
3sg. ∗-ó-r / ∗-t-ó-r ∗-ó / ∗-t-ó ???
1du. ∗-wós-dʰh₂ ∗-wé-dʰh₂ —
2du. ??? ??? ???
3du. ??? ??? ???
1pl. ∗-mós-dʰh₂ ∗-mé-dʰh₂ —
2pl. ∗-dʰh₂ué³⁶ ∗-dʰh₂ué ∗-dʰh₂ué
3pl. ∗-ró-r / ∗-ntó-r ∗-ró / ∗-ntó ???
Some comments are necessary to make this system intelligible.
In PIE the primary endings marked the non-past of imperfective stems, while
the secondary endings marked the past tenses of both imperfective and perfective
stems. The imperative endings were restricted to that mood. By Core IE, when
the aspect system was evolving toward inflectional status and the subjunctive and
optative moods were in place, the distribution of endings was more complex. Sec-
ondary endings characterized the optative mood, probably the subjunctive mood,
and the past tenses of aorist stems (called the ‘aorist indicative’ because there was
no non-past aorist indicative) and present stems (the ‘imperfect indicative’). Pri-
mary endings marked the non-past tense of present stems (the ‘present indicative’)
and might have begun to spread to the subjunctive mood. However, in Nuclear IE
³⁵ See Ringe (2007; with references).
³⁶ This reconstruction is intended to account for the shape of Hitt. -ttuma: ∗-dʰh₂ue > ∗-dduwe
> -ttuma by regular sound changes. Skt -dʰva and (indirectly) Gk -σθε presuppose a form without
the laryngeal, but if the PIE ending was ∗-dʰwe we have no source for the Hittite -m-. The stop-plus-
laryngeal cluster accounts simultaneously for Hitt. -tt-and -m-, and the existence of the latter seems
to show that Sievers’ Law operated after clusters of two obstruents in PIE, though it ceased to do so at
some point in the development of Indo-Iranian (cf. Barber 2013: 30–7 with references).


===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
38 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
thematic stems and subjunctives the primary 1sg. ending ∗-o-mi was replaced by
h₂e-paradigm ∗-o-h₂ (see the discussion in 2.3.3 (i)).
There are obvious similarities between the primary, secondary, and impera-
tive endings. Since the relations were somewhat different in the active and the
mediopassive, I discuss them separately in that order.
Except in the 2du. and 3du., which are puzzling, and leaving aside the 2sg.
imperative (see below), it is clear that the active secondary endings were the ‘basic’
members of the paradigm. In the sg. and the 3pl., the primary endings were nor-
mally derived from the secondary endings by the addition of the ‘hic-et-nunc’
particle ∗-i. In the 3sg. and 3pl., the imperative endings were derived from the sec-
ondary endings by the addition of a parallel particle ∗-u (or ∗-ow; the daughters
disagree). In the 2pl. all three were the same, which may be an archaism or may
simply reflect impoverishment in a relatively peripheral inflectional category. In
the 2du. and 3du. it appears that the secondary ending was likewise used in the
imperative. In the 1du. and 1pl. it looks as though a different particle was added to
produce the primary endings, though the details are obscure. The 2sg. imperative
was apparently endingless, and was probably the unmarked member of the imper-
ative paradigm; ∗-dʰí seems to have been some sort of emphatic particle added to
originally endingless forms.
The hic-et-nunc particle of the mediopassive seems to have been ∗-r rather
than ∗-i; it survives in Anatolian, Tocharian, and Italo-Celtic—all peripheral sub-
groups of the family.³⁷ In the Central daughters, however, including Greek, it was
replaced by ∗-y, apparently reflecting the spread of active ∗-i to the mediopas-
sive. In the 1du. and 1pl. it looks like the mediopassive endings were derived
from the active ones by suffixation of a particle following the (active) hic-et-nunc
particle. In the 2pl., as in the active, all three endings appear to have been the
same. The unreconstructability of mediopassive dual and imperative endings is
an artifact of the defective attestation of their reflexes: in effect, only Greek and
Indo-Iranian (and, for the imperative, Hittite) provide any evidence, and they
disagree.
³⁷ There are a few late Phrygian examples of αδδακετορ and αββερετορ beside αδδακετ and
αββερετ; they are usually taken to be mediopassive forms (Haas 1966: 226, Brixhe 2004: 785 with
references). But they are used in exactly the same formulas as the forms without -ορ (Haas 1966: 119,
123–4), so that there is no evidence other than their shape that they are actually mediopassive; it is
not impossible that their prehistory is completely different. (For further discussion, see Sowa 2007:
75–7, whose solution presupposes a reconstruction of the PIE verb different from that proposed here.)
If they really are mediopassive, they suggest an interesting hypothesis regarding the diversification of
Core IE, namely that there was a dialect chain as follows:
Italic – Celtic | Germanic – Balto-Slavic – Indo-Iranian – Greek – Phrygian,
with a significant but incomplete break between Celtic and Germanic, and that the replacement of ∗ -r
by ∗-y in the mediopassive endings failed to occur at either end of the chain. Such a dialect chain would
probably have to predate the geographical arrangement suggested in Cowgill (1986: 65).


===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 39
Reflexes of the third-person mediopassive endings (primary) sg. ∗-ó-r, pl. ∗-ró-r,
(secondary) sg. ∗-ó, pl. ∗-ró appear only in a restricted set of verbs and forms in
Anatolian and Indo-Iranian; it is clear that already in PIE they had largely been
replaced by the competing endings with sg. ∗-t-, pl. ∗-nt-, whose distinctive conso-
nants have evidently been imported from the active. To judge from the situation
in Sanskrit, 3pl. ∗-ró survived longest in the optative.
The underlyingly accented endings of the mediopassive and the non-singular
active were accented on the surface if the stem was unaccented; otherwise they,
like the endings of the singular active, were unaccented on the surface (i.e. the
leftmost underlying accent of a verb form surfaced). The alternative forms of the
active 3pl. were distributed as follows. If the stem was athematic and unaccented,
the accented full-grade form of the ending surfaced; if the stem was accented or
thematic or both, the zero-grade form of the ending surfaced.
The PIE h₂e-paradigm, and the Nuclear IE perfect (stative) that was descended
from it, exhibited an almost completely different set of endings in the indicative.
Exceptionally, primary and secondary (i.e. non-past and past) were not distin-
guished, nor were active and mediopassive. The endings can be reconstructed as
follows:
1sg. ∗-h a₂
2sg. ∗-th₂a
3sg. ∗ -e
1du. ∗-wé (∗-wéH?; see the 1pl. below)
2du. ???
3du. ???
1pl. ∗-mé (∗-méH?; see Jasanoff 2003a: 32)
2pl. ∗-é
3pl. ∗-ḗr < ∗∗-érs (cf. Jasanoff 1988b: 71 fn. 3) ~ ∗ -r ̥s
The unaccented 3pl. ending must have been employed when the non-singular stem
was e-grade and accented, though we do not have enough evidence to reconstruct
actual examples of such forms. The similarity between these endings and those
of the (secondary) mediopassive is obvious, though specialists are not agreed on
what inferences should be drawn from that fact. Once again the dual endings are
not reconstructable because Greek and Indo-Iranian disagree.
2.3.3 (iv) Non-finite forms
Most Nuclear IE active participles were made with a hysterokinetic suffix ∗-ónt-
~ ∗-nt- (see 2.3.4 (ii)); mediopassive participles ended in a suffix ∗-mh₁nó-.³⁸
(As Fellner 2021 demonstrates, the Tocharian participles do exhibit a similar
³⁸ This is the underlying form. It must have surfaced as ∗ -m̥ h₁nó- after the final non-syllabic of
athematic stems and as ∗-mno- after thematic stems (see 2.2.4. (i) ad fin. and 2.2.5), but early leveling in
the daughters has disrupted that pattern, yielding e.g. Greek -μενο- and Tocharian B -mane < ∗-mh₁no-.


===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
40 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
distribution, though Toch. B -mane, A -māṃ can also be affixed to active intransi-
tive stems.) The former suffix, at least, also appears in Anatolian, though there
it exhibits an ergative pattern (passive if affixed to transitive stems, active if to
intransitives). The Nuclear IE perfect participle exhibited a different suffix ∗ -wos-
~ ∗-us-; it has no clear Anatolian cognate. A Core IE infinitive suffix ∗-dʰyo- (with
case endings), suffixed to aspect stems, is reconstructable, but not much is known
about its distribution, since it survives only in Indo-Iranian and Italic (see Rix
1976b, Fortson 2012 with references); possibly it was suffixed only to present
stems. Most of the infinitives of the daughter languages were clearly caseforms of
derived nouns in PIE, and of course those nouns were formed directly from the
verb root rather than from aspect stems.
2.3.3 (v) The architecture of Core IE verb paradigms
The system outlined in this section was first codified by the late Warren Cowgill,
whose conclusions regarding the Core IE verb still seem to me to be largely
correct.³⁹
Verb roots appear usually to have constructed aspect stems according to the
following pattern. If a basic verb made only one aspect stem, it was unaffixed; thus
we find present ∗h₁és-ti ‘(s)he is’, ∗wés-tor ‘(s)he is wearing’, and ∗h₂áǵe-ti ‘(s)he
is driving’ (none with any aorist or perfect), aorist ∗bʰúH-t ‘(s)he became’ and
∗h₁ludʰé-d ‘(s)he arrived’ (neither with any present or perfect), perfect ∗wóyd-e
‘(s)he knows’ (with no present or aorist). If a basic verb made two or three stems,
either the present or the aorist was unaffixed, and the other of those two stems was
affixed, as was the perfect. The following verbs illustrate the system (all forms are
given in the 3sg.):
present aorist perfect
∗dʰé-dʰeh₁ti ‘is putting’ ∗dʰéh₁-t ‘put’ —
∗stí-stah₂-ti ‘is getting up’ ∗stáh₂-t ‘stood up’ ∗ste-stóh₂-a (∗/-e/) ‘is
standing’
∗tl̥ -ná-h₂-ti ‘is lifting’ ∗télh₂-t ‘lifted’ ∗te-tólh₂-a (∗/-e/) ‘is
holding up’
∗sí-sd-eti ‘is getting seated’ ∗sédst (= ∗/séd+t/) ‘sat —
down’
∗ gʷm̥ -sḱé-ti ‘is walking’ ∗ gʷém-d ‘stepped’ ∗ gʷe-gʷóm-e ‘has the feet
in place’
∗ǵn̥ h₁-yé-tor ‘is being born’ ∗ǵn̥ h₁-tó ‘was born’ ∗ǵe-ǵónh₁-e ‘is … years old’
∗wér-ye-ti ‘is saying’ ∗wérh₁-t ‘said’ —
³⁹ So far as I can discover, Cowgill published this explicitly only in Cowgill (1974b: 435–6; reprinted
in Cowgill 2006a: 28–30); he was still of the same opinion in the early 1980s.


===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 41
∗déyḱ-ti ‘is pointing out’ ∗dḗyḱ-s-t ‘pointed out’ —
∗wéǵʰe-ti ‘is transporting’ ∗wḗǵʰ-s-t ‘transported’ —
∗wértsti (= ∗/wért+ti/) — ∗we-wórt-e ‘is turned
‘is turning around’ toward’
— ∗h₂néḱ-t ‘reached’ ∗h₂a-h₂nóḱ-e ‘extends to’
Derived verbs made only present stems, which were always affixed.
The system just outlined appears to be a coherent inflectional system, and it
certainly became that in the daughters of Core IE; but there are indications that it
was still a derivational system down into the prehistory of Greek—i.e. after Core
IE had begun to diversify. Greek has more than twenty verbs that have simple
thematic presents with e-grade roots and simple thematic aorists with zero-grade
roots, but in every case only one of the two stems can be securely reconstructed for
Core IE (Ringe 2012: 125–31). It appears that two aspect stems developed out of
one in those cases. The most obvious example is the Greek present λείπε¯ν ‘to leave
behind (serially), to try to abandon’. Comparison of Skt pres. (3sg.) riṇákti and
Lat. pres. linquere virtually forces us to reconstruct a nasal-infixed present for this
verb,⁴⁰ and it follows that Greek must have replaced that inherited present with
a simple thematic present; but the only possible source for such an innovation is
the aorist subjunctive, whose shape the Greek present replicates exactly. The sim-
plest hypothesis is that at least a few aorist subjunctives became present stems in
Greek (and then furnished a model for the remodeling of other verbs); but that
is most unlikely to have happened in an inflectional system based on the opposi-
tion of present and aorist.⁴¹ It appears that the aspect system was still derivational
even in Central IE, though at that point it would not continue to be for much
longer.
There are other scattered indications in Nuclear IE that the aspect system was
still derivational. Most strikingly, two presents and two aorists seem to be recon-
structable for the root ∗ǵnoh₃- ‘recognize’: present ∗ǵn̥ h₃-sḱé/ó- (Lat. noscereˉ, Gk
γιγν ωσκε´¯ν (with innovative reduplication), OPers. subj. 3sg. xšnāsātiy) and nasal-
infixed ∗ǵn̥ -nó-h₃- ~ ∗ǵn̥ -n-h₃- (Skt 3sg. jānā́ ti, Toch. A 2sg. knānat) and aorist
∗ǵnóh₃- ~ ∗ǵn̥ h₃- (Gk γνῶναι, Skt precative 3sg. jñeyā́ s) and ∗ǵnḗh₃-s- ~ ∗ǵnóh₃-s-
(Hitt. pres. ganeszi, Toch. A pret. 1sg. kñasu, 2sg. kñasa¨ṣt). But it does appear that
by the Central IE stage the verb system was evolving into a set of fixed inflectional
paradigms, more or less in the shape hypothesized by Cowgill.
The following section will illustrate the Core IE verb system more fully with
complete paradigms of several reconstructable verbs.
⁴⁰ From which I remain convinced that Sappho’s ἀπυλιμπάνω is not directly descended; see 4.2.1
(ii), 5.4.2 (i) for discussion.
⁴¹ The superficially similar development in Germanic is much easier to motivate; see Ringe (2017:
182–6).


===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
42 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
2.3.3 (vi) Sample Central IE verb paradigms
In the finite categories of these paradigms the forms are given in the order 1sg., 2sg.,
3sg., 1du., 2du., 3du., 1pl., 2pl., 3pl.; participles are given in the masc. nom. sg. and
gen. sg., followed by a semicolon, then the fem. nom. sg. and gen. sg., except for o-
stem participles, which are given in the masc. nom. sg. only. Infinitives are omitted,
as are displaced imperatives. Asterisks have been omitted for typographical clarity.
A consequence of our uncertainty regarding the reconstruction of the thematic
optative (see 2.3.3 (ii)) is that even Core IE verb paradigms cannot always be
given in full. Since Greek clearly belonged to the Central group, I have given
the paradigms ancestral to that group, with thematic optatives in ∗-oy(h₁)- and
mediopassive primary endings in ∗-y, the latter replacing PIE ∗-r (see 2.3.3 (iii)).
• h₁es- ‘be’ (root present only, active only)
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
h₁ésmi h₁ésm ̥h₁ésoh₂ h₁siḗm —
h₁ési h₁és h₁éses h₁siéh₁s h₁és, h₁sdʰí
h₁ésti h₁ést h₁ésed h₁siéh₁t h₁éstu
h₁suós h₁sué h₁ésowe h₁sih₁wé —
h₁stés h₁stóm h₁ésetom h₁sih₁tóm h₁stóm
h₁stés h₁sta ̄́m h₁ésetām h₁sih₁ta ̄́m h₁sta ̄́m
h₁sm ̥ós h₁sm ̥é h₁ésome h₁sih₁mé —
h₁sté h₁sté h₁ésete h₁sih₁té h₁sté
h₁sénti h₁sénd h₁ésond h₁sih₁énd h₁séntu
participle h₁sónts, h₁sn ̥tés; h₁sóntih₂, h₁sn ̥tyáh₂s
• leykʷ- ‘leave behind’ (nasal-infixed present, root-aorist, reduplicated perfect)
present stem, active:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
linékʷmi linékʷm ̥linékʷoh₂ linkʷiḗm —
linékʷsi linékʷs linékʷes linkʷiéh₁s linékʷ, linkʷdʰí
linékʷti linékʷt linékʷed linkʷiéh₁t linékʷtu
linkuós linkué linékʷowe linkʷih₁wé —
linkʷtés linkʷtóm linékʷetom linkʷih₁tóm linkʷtóm
linkʷtés linkʷta ̄́m linékʷetām linkʷih₁ta ̄́m linkʷta ̄́m
linkʷm ̥ós linkʷm ̥é linékʷome linkʷih₁mé —
linkʷté linkʷté linékʷete linkʷih₁té linkʷté
linkʷénti linkʷénd linékʷond linkʷih₁énd linkʷéntu
participle linkʷónts, linkʷn ̥tés; linkʷóntih₂, linkʷn ̥tyáh₂s


===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 43
present stem, mediopassive:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
linkʷh₂áy linkʷh₂á linékʷoh₂a linkʷih₁h₂á —
linkʷth₂áy linkʷth₂á linékʷeth₂a linkʷih₁th₂á ???
linkʷtóy linkʷtó linékʷeto linkʷih₁tó ???
linkuósdʰh₂ linkuédʰh₂ linékʷowedʰh₂ linkʷih₁wédʰh₂ —
??? ??? ??? ??? ???
??? ??? ??? ??? ???
linkʷm ̥ósdʰh₂ linkʷm ̥édʰh₂ linékʷomedʰh₂ linkʷih₁médʰh₂ —
linkʷdʰh₂ué linkʷdʰh₂ué linékʷedʰh₂ue linkʷih₁dʰh₂ué linkʷdʰh₂ué
linkʷn ̥tóy linkʷn ̥tó linékʷonto linkʷih₁ró ???
participle linkʷm ̥h₁nós
aorist stem, active:
2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
léykʷm ̥léykʷoh₂ likʷyḗm —
léykʷs léykʷes likʷyéh₁s léykʷ, likʷdʰí
léykʷt léykʷed likʷyéh₁t léykʷtu
likwé léykʷowe likʷih₁wé —
likʷtóm léykʷetom likʷih₁tóm likʷtóm
likʷta ̄́m léykʷetām likʷih₁ta ̄́m likʷta ̄́m
likʷmé léykʷome likʷih₁mé —
likʷté léykʷete likʷih₁té likʷté
likʷénd léykʷond likʷih₁énd likʷéntu
participle likʷónts, likʷn ̥tés; likʷóntih₂, likʷn ̥tyáh₂s
aorist stem, mediopassive:
2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
likʷh₂á léykʷoh₂a likʷih₁h₂á —
likʷth₂á léykʷeth₂a likʷih₁th₂á ???
likʷtó léykʷeto likʷih₁tó ???
likwédʰh₂ léykʷowedʰh₂ likʷih₁wédʰh₂ —
??? ??? ??? ???
??? ??? ??? ???
likʷmédʰh₂ léykʷomedʰh₂ likʷih₁médʰh₂ —
likʷdʰh₂ué léykʷedʰh₂ue likʷih₁dʰh₂ué likʷdʰh₂ué
likʷn ̥tó léykʷonto likʷih₁ró ???
participle likʷm ̥h₁nós


===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
44 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
perfect stem (active):
indicative subjunctive optative imperative
lelóykʷh₂a leléykʷoh₂ lelikʷyḗm —
lelóykʷth₂a leléykʷes lelikʷyéh₁s ???, lelikʷdʰí
lelóykʷe leléykʷed lelikʷyéh₁t ???
lelikwé leléykʷowe lelikʷih₁wé —
??? leléykʷetom lelikʷih₁tóm ???
??? leléykʷetām lelikʷih₁ta ̄́m ???
lelikʷmé leléykʷome lelikʷih₁mé —
lelikʷé leléykʷete lelikʷih₁té ???
lelikʷḗr leléykʷond lelikʷih₁énd ???
participle lelikwṓs, lelikusés; lelikwósih₂, lelikusyáh₂s
• dʰeh₁- ‘put’ (reduplicated athematic present, root aorist)
present stem, active:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
dʰédʰeh₁mi dʰédʰēm dʰédʰeh₁oh₂ dʰédʰh₁ih₁m ̥—
dʰédʰeh₁si dʰédʰeh₁s dʰédʰeh₁es dʰédʰh₁ih₁s dʰédʰeh₁, dʰédʰh₁dʰi
dʰédʰeh₁ti dʰédʰeh₁t dʰédʰeh₁ed dʰédʰh₁ih₁t dʰédʰeh₁tu
dʰédʰh₁uos dʰédʰh₁ue dʰédʰeh₁owe dʰédʰh₁ih₁we —
dʰédʰh₁tes dʰédʰh₁tom dʰédʰeh₁etom dʰédʰh₁ih₁tom dʰédʰh₁tom
dʰédʰh₁tes dʰédʰh₁tām dʰédʰeh₁etām dʰédʰh₁ih₁tām dʰédʰh₁tām
dʰédʰh₁m ̥os dʰédʰh₁m ̥e dʰédʰeh₁ome dʰédʰh₁ih₁me —
dʰédʰh₁te dʰédʰh₁te dʰédʰeh₁ete dʰédʰh₁ih₁te dʰédʰh₁te
dʰédʰh₁n ̥ti dʰédʰh₁n ̥d dʰédʰeh₁ond dʰédʰh₁ih₁end dʰédʰh₁n ̥tu
participle dʰédʰh₁n̥ ts, dʰédʰh₁n̥ tos; dʰédʰh₁n̥ tih₂, dʰédʰh₁n̥ tyah₂s (?)
present stem, mediopassive:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative
d éd hʰʰ₁h₂ay dʰédʰh₁h₂a d éd ehʰʰ₁oh₂a d éd hʰʰ₁ih₁h₂a
dʰédʰh₁th₂ay dʰédʰh₁th₂a dʰédʰeh₁eth₂a dʰédʰh₁ih₁th₂a
dʰédʰh₁toy dʰédʰh₁to dʰédʰeh₁eto dʰédʰh₁ih₁to
dʰédʰh₁uosdʰh₂ dʰédʰh₁uedʰh₂ dʰédʰeh₁owedʰh₂ dʰédʰh₁ih₁wedʰh₂
??? ??? ??? ???
??? ??? ??? ???
dʰédʰh₁m ̥osdʰh₂ dʰédʰh₁m ̥edʰh₂ dʰédʰeh₁omedʰh₂ dʰédʰh₁ih₁medʰh₂
dʰédʰh₁dʰh₂ue dʰédʰh₁dʰh₂ue dʰédʰeh₁edʰh₂ue dʰédʰh₁ih₁dʰh₂ue
dʰédʰh₁n ̥toy dʰédʰh₁n ̥to dʰédʰeh₁onto dʰédʰh₁ih₁ro
(and the only imperative form reconstructable is the 2pl., identical with the 2ary
indicative)
participle dʰédʰh₁m̥ h₁nos


===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 45
aorist stem, active:
2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
dʰḗm dʰéh₁oh₂ dʰh₁iḗm —
dʰéh₁s dʰéh₁es dʰh₁iéh₁s dʰéh₁, dʰh₁dʰí
dʰéh₁t dʰéh₁ed dʰh₁iéh₁t dʰéh₁tu
dʰh₁ué dʰéh₁owe dʰh₁ih₁wé —
dʰh₁tóm dʰéh₁etom dʰh₁ih₁tóm dʰh₁tóm
dʰh₁tā́ m dʰéh₁etām dʰh₁ih₁tā́ m dʰh₁tā́ m
dʰh₁m̥ é dʰéh₁ome dʰh₁ih₁mé —
dʰh₁té dʰéh₁ete dʰh₁ih₁té dʰh₁té
dʰh₁énd dʰéh₁ond dʰh₁ih₁énd dʰh₁éntu
participle dʰh₁ónts, dʰh₁n̥ tés; dʰh₁óntih₂, dʰh₁n̥ tyáh₂s
aorist stem, mediopassive:
2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
dʰh₁h₂á dʰéh₁oh₂a dʰh₁ih₁h₂á —
dʰh₁th₂á dʰéh₁eth₂a dʰh₁ih₁th₂á ???
dʰh₁tó dʰéh₁eto dʰh₁ih₁tó ???
dʰh₁uédʰh₂ dʰéh₁owedʰh₂ dʰh₁ih₁wédʰh₂ —
??? ??? ??? ???
??? ??? ??? ???
dʰh₁m ̥édʰh₂ dʰéh₁omedʰh₂ dʰh₁ih₁médʰh₂ —
dʰh₁dʰh₂ué dʰéh₁edʰh₂ue dʰh₁ih₁dʰh₂ué dʰh₁dʰh₂ué
dʰh₁n ̥tó dʰéh₁onto dʰh₁ih₁ró ???
participle dʰh₁m̥ h₁nós
• bʰer- ‘carry’ (simple thematic present)
present stem, active:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
bʰéroh₂ bʰérom bʰérˉoh₂ bʰéroyh₁m ̥—
bʰéresi bʰéres bʰérēs bʰéroys bʰére
bʰéreti bʰéred bʰérēd bʰéroyd bʰéretu
bʰérowos bʰérowe bʰérˉowe bʰéroywe —
bʰéretes bʰéretom bʰérētom bʰéroytom bʰéretom
bʰéretes bʰéretām bʰérētām bʰéroytām bʰéretām
bʰéromos bʰérome bʰérˉome bʰéroyme —
bʰérete bʰérete bʰérēte bʰéroyte bʰérete
bʰéronti bʰérond bʰérˉond bʰéroyh₁end bʰérontu
participle bʰéronts, bʰérontos; bʰérontih₂, bʰérontiah₂s


===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
46 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
present stem, mediopassive:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
bʰéroh₂ay bʰéroh₂a bʰérˉoh₂a bʰéroyh₂a —
bʰéreth₂ay bʰéreth₂a bʰérēth₂a bʰéroyth₂a ???
bʰéretoy bʰéreto bʰérēto bʰéroyto ???
bʰérowosdʰh₂ bʰérowedʰh₂ bʰérˉowedʰh₂ bʰéroywedʰh₂ —
??? ??? ??? ??? ???
??? ??? ??? ??? ???
bʰéromosdʰh₂ bʰéromedʰh₂ bʰérˉomedʰh₂ bʰéroymedʰh₂ —
bʰéredʰh₂ue bʰéredʰh₂ue bʰérēdʰh₂ue bʰéroydʰh₂ue bʰéredʰh₂ue
bʰérontoy bʰéronto bʰérˉonto bʰéroyro ???
participle bʰéromnos (← /-o-mh₁no-s/)
• gʷem- ‘step’ (sḱé-present, root aorist, reduplicated perfect; active only)
present stem:
1ary indic. 2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
gʷm ̥sḱóh₂ gʷm ̥sḱóm gʷm ̥sḱṓh₂ gʷm ̥sḱóyh₁m ̥—
gʷm ̥sḱési gʷm ̥sḱés gʷm ̥sḱḗs gʷm ̥sḱóys gʷm ̥sḱé
gʷm ̥sḱéti gʷm ̥sḱéd gʷm ̥sḱḗd gʷm ̥sḱóyd gʷm ̥sḱétu
gʷm ̥sḱówos gʷm ̥sḱówe gʷm ̥sḱṓwe gʷm ̥sḱóywe —
gʷm ̥sḱétes gʷm ̥sḱétom gʷm ̥sḱḗtom gʷm ̥sḱóytom gʷm ̥sḱétom
gʷm ̥sḱétes gʷm ̥sḱétām gʷm ̥sḱḗtām gʷm ̥sḱóytām gʷm ̥sḱétām
gʷm ̥sḱómos gʷm ̥sḱóme gʷm ̥sḱṓme gʷm ̥sḱóyme —
gʷm ̥sḱéte gʷm ̥sḱéte gʷm ̥sḱḗte gʷm ̥sḱóyte gʷm ̥sḱéte
gʷm ̥sḱónti gʷm ̥sḱónd gʷm ̥sḱṓnd gʷm ̥sḱóyh₁end gʷm ̥sḱóntu
participle gʷm̥ sḱónts, gʷm̥ sḱóntos; gʷm̥ sḱóntih₂, gʷm̥ sḱóntiah₂s
aorist stem:
2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
gʷḗm⁴² gʷémoh₂ gʷm̥ yḗm —
gʷḗm⁴³ gʷémes gʷm̥ yéh₁s gʷém, gʷm̥ dʰí
gʷémd⁴⁴ gʷémed gʷm̥ yéh₁t gʷémtu
gʷm̥ wé gʷémowe gʷmih₁wé —
gʷm̥ tóm gʷémetom gʷmih₁tóm gʷm̥ tóm
gʷm̥ tā́ m gʷémetām gʷmih₁tā́ m gʷm̥ tā́ m
gʷm̥ (m)é gʷémome gʷmih₁mé —
⁴² < ∗ gʷém-m̥ by Stang’s Law.
⁴³ < ∗ gʷém-s by Szemerényi’s Law.
⁴⁴ Possibly ∗ gʷḗn by assimilation and Szemerényi’s Law; cf. Kim (2001).


===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 47
gʷm̥ té gʷémete gʷmih₁té gʷm̥ té
gʷménd gʷémond gʷmih₁énd gʷméntu
participle gʷmónts, gʷmn̥ tés; gʷmóntih₂, gʷmn̥ tyáh₂s
perfect stem:
indicative subjunctive optative imperative
gʷegʷómh₂a gʷegʷémoh₂ gʷegʷm ̥yḗm —
gʷegʷómth₂a gʷegʷémes gʷegʷm ̥yéh₁s ???, gʷegʷm ̥dʰí
gʷegʷóme gʷegʷémed gʷegʷm ̥yéh₁t ???
gʷegʷm ̥wé gʷegʷémowe gʷegʷmih₁wé —
??? gʷegʷémetom gʷegʷmih₁tóm ???
??? gʷegʷémetām gʷegʷmih₁ta ̄́m ???
gʷegʷm ̥(m)é gʷegʷémome gʷegʷmih₁mé —
gʷegʷmé gʷegʷémete gʷegʷmih₁té ???
gʷegʷmḗr gʷegʷémond gʷegʷmih₁énd ???
participle gʷegʷm̥ wṓs, gʷegʷmusés; gʷegʷm̥ wósih₂, gʷegʷmusyáh₂s
• weǵʰ- ‘transport (in a vehicle)’ (simple thematic present, s-aorist)
present stem, active and mediopassive: exactly like that of ∗bʰer- (see above)
aorist stem, active:
2ary indic. subjunctive optative imperative
wḗǵʰsm ̥wéǵʰsoh₂ wéǵʰsih₁m ̥—
wḗǵʰs wéǵʰses wéǵʰsih₁s wḗǵʰs
wḗǵʰst wéǵʰsed wéǵʰsih₁t wḗǵʰstu
wéǵʰsue wéǵʰsowe wéǵʰsih₁we —
wéǵʰstom wéǵʰsetom wéǵʰsih₁tom wéǵʰstom
wéǵʰstām wéǵʰsetām wéǵʰsih₁tām wéǵʰstām
wéǵʰsm ̥e wéǵʰsome wéǵʰsih₁me —
wéǵʰste wéǵʰsete wéǵʰsih₁te wéǵʰste
wéǵʰsn ̥d wéǵʰsond wéǵʰsih₁end wéǵʰsn ̥tu
participle wéǵʰsn̥ ts, wéǵʰsn̥ tos; wéǵʰsn̥ tih₂, wéǵʰsn̥ tyah₂s
(The mediopassive of s-aorists has been remodeled everywhere that it
survives; presumably it had an accented e-grade root and the expected suffixes
and endings.)
Some generalizations about the above paradigms can be made. Thematic stems,
including subjunctives, had fixed accent on the stem. In athematic stems the accent
usually alternated, falling on the endings in the mediopassive and the non-singular
active, but on the preceding syllable in the singular active. However, s-aorists
seem to have had fixed accent on the root, and it appears that there were a few


===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
48 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
root-presents that exhibited a similar pattern; and reduplicated presents (but not
perfects) seem to have had fixed accent on the reduplicating syllable. No matter
what the accentual pattern was, there was normally a difference in ablaut between
the singular active and all other forms of athematic stems; the commoner attested
patterns are exemplified in the above paradigms.
Obviously the inflection of thematic stems was simpler and easier to learn. In
the development of Greek, athematic presents would become less common, while
numerous innovative thematic presents and aorists would be created.
2.3.4 PIE noun inflection
2.3.4 (i) Endings
Like verb stems, nouns fell into two purely formal classes, athematic and the-
matic, the latter ending in the thematic vowel. The inflection of thematic nouns
was already at least slightly different from that of athematic nouns in PIE, but it
seems clear that it became much more different in Nuclear IE. Not all the details
can be recovered; in addition to gaps in the evidence, we have to reckon with the
possibility that the paradigms of thematic and athematic nouns have converged in
Anatolian. For a similar reconstruction of the endings (with different judgments
on some points), see Kim (2012a).
The athematic endings reconstructable for PIE proper are the following:
singular plural dual
vocative -0 ∗ -es ∗-h₁e, neuter ∗-ih₁
nominative ∗-s ~ -0, neuter -0 ∗ -es ∗-h₁e, neuter ∗-ih₁
accusative ∗ -m, neuter -0 ∗-ns < ∗∗-ms⁴⁵ ∗-h₁e, neuter ∗-ih₁
genitive ∗-és ~ ∗-s → ∗ -os ∗-óHom (∗H ≠ ∗h₂)
dative ∗-éy ∗-ós
locative -0´ → ∗-í ∗-sú (?)
instrumental ∗-éh₁ ~ ∗-h₁ (?) ∗-ís (?)
allative ∗-áh₂ (~ ∗-h₂ ?) ???
The endings reconstructed without question marks have left reasonably clear
reflexes in Anatolian languages, especially Hittite, though the dual has been
reduced to a few fossils (see Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 68 fn. 15 with references);
note especially Hitt. dat. pl. -as = Lycian -e < ∗-os, Old Hitt. gen. pl. -an < ∗-oHom,
and endingless locatives like Hitt. dagān ‘on the ground’. The thematic inst. sg. end-
ing is indirectly attested in Hittite (see below); the loc. pl. ending is not attested in
Anatolian, but it is well attested in Core IE and has no obvious source (as an adver-
bial ending, for example). The allative is attested as a productive case only in Old
Hittite, and no plural forms are known. On the inst. pl. see below.
⁴⁵ For possible Hittite evidence that ∗-ms was still the PIE ending, see Kim (2012b).


===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 49
It is clear that the endings of the direct cases were underlyingly unaccented,
while those of the oblique cases were underlyingly accented but lost their accent
whenever there was an accent to the left in the form (i.e. the leftmost underlying
accent surfaced). One would expect ablaut to correlate with accent, but the directly
reconstructable situation was no longer so straightforward. Of the singular oblique
endings, the genitive showed extensive ablaut alternations which survive fairly well
in the daughters. The instrumental ending ablauted too, but the distribution of the
alternants is difficult to reconstruct, largely because most of our evidence comes
from a single daughter, Indo-Iranian.⁴⁶ For the dative ending only a full-grade form
is reconstructable. In the plural the system of ablaut in endings had broken down
completely; each ending appeared in only a single form, and there was evidently
no longer any relation between ablaut and accent.
Most of the zero-endings of the non-neuter nom. sg. arose by Szemerényi’s Law
(see 2.2.4 (iv)) or are obviously analogical on those that did, but most stems in ∗-h₂
lacked an overt nom. sg. ending for reasons that are unclear. On the other hand,
the voc. sg. and the neut. sg. direct cases were underlyingly endingless. The loc.
sg. was rather different. It seems to have been characterized by an ending which
had an underlying accent but no segmental portion to ‘carry’ it, with the result
that the accent had to be linked leftward to the last syllable of the stem. Such a
remarkable shape was of course unstable; though endingless locatives are securely
attested in Hittite and (especially) in ancient Indo-Iranian languages, the loc. sg.
tended to be recharacterized with the hic-et-nunc particle ∗-i, which eventually was
reinterpreted as an accented ending ∗-í. The development of the proterokinetic i-
stem loc. sg. ∗∗-éy-i > ∗-ēy by Stang’s Law (see 2.2.4 (iv)) shows that that process
must have been underway in PIE (as Craig Melchert reminds me).
Strikingly, no distinctive neut. pl. endings can be reconstructed. It appears
that collectives derived with a suffix ∗-h₂, which were grammatically singular,
effectively functioned as neut. plurals in PIE.⁴⁷ Since Szemerényi’s Law affected
sequences ∗-Rh₂ as well as ∗-Rs, the most archaic reconstructable collectives of
r-stems and r/n-stems ended in ∗ -ˉor, while those of n-stems ended in ∗ -ˉo. What
happened to collectives in the daughters will be discussed below.
The thematic endings should have been identical to the athematic endings, pre-
ceded by the thematic vowel ∗ -o- ~ ∗-e-. Ablauting endings appeared in the zero
grade; so did the non-neut. dual direct ending, according to all the Nuclear IE evi-
dence, though there is no evidence that it ablauted in athematic stems. Not all the
⁴⁶ For that reason I hesitate to accept the hypothesis of Kim (2012a) that the unexpected distribution
of full-grade ∗-eh₁ shows that the ending was originally a postposition, though that is still likely on
general grounds.
⁴⁷ Such collectives can still be formed to non-neuter nouns in Hittite (Hoffner and Melchert 2008:
68–9). Similar phenomena occur in Arabic and Old Georgian, for example. For a comprehensive
discussion of number systems, see Corbett (2000).


===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
50 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
endings are clearly attested in the daughters; a reasonable reconstruction of those
that are is the following:
singular plural dual
vocative ∗ -e, neuter ∗ -o-m ∗ -o-es ∗-o-h₁, neuter ∗-o-y(h₁)
nominative ∗ -o-s, neuter ∗ -o-m ∗ -o-es ∗-o-h₁, neuter ∗-o-y(h₁)
accusative ∗ -o-m, neuter ∗ -o-m ∗-o-ns ← ∗∗ -ˉom⁴⁸ ∗-o-h₁, neuter ∗-o-y(h₁)
genitive ∗ -o-s ∗-o-oHom (?)
dative ∗ -o-ey ∗-o-os (?)
locative (∗∗-e →) ∗ -e-y ???
instrumental ∗-o-h₁ ???
allative ∗-a-h₂ (∗-o-h₂?) ???
The one clear difference from athematic inflection is that the neut. direct case ends
in ∗-m; that is guaranteed by the equation Hitt. iukan = Skt yugám = Gk ζυγ´ον =
Lat. iugum < PIE ∗yugóm ‘yoke’, a fossilized derivative of ∗yewg- ‘join’ made to
a pattern that is not productive in any daughter. The gen. sg. might be expected
to end in ∗-o-s, and in fact the Hitt. ending is -as (though that could be an ath-
ematic ending that has spread to thematic stems).⁴⁹ Inst. sg. ∗-o-h₁ is probably
attested in the Old Hittite connective particle ta (Rieken 1999b: 86). Dual ∗-o-h₁
and ∗-o-y(h₁) (the latter with loss of the laryngeal when no word-initial syllabic
followed) are supported by evidence across Nuclear IE; dat. sg. ∗-o-ey (with con-
traction of the vowels in hiatus), and apparently nom.-voc. pl. ∗-o-es (likewise with
contraction) are supported by evidence across Core IE. That the all. sg. ending was
∗-a-h₂ (with a zero-grade ending) and the gen. and dat. pl. were ∗-o-oHom and
∗-o-os (without ablaut) are guesses from the general behavior of sg. and pl. end-
ings; Hitt. all. sg. -a and dat. pl. -as could reflect forms with or without contraction
of vowel sequences, and in the gen. pl. the contraction of two vowels and of three
would yield the same outcome in all the daughters. Only the endingless loc. sg. ∗∗ -e
is not securely attested anywhere, though it might survive in Gk τῆλε ‘far’ (Alan
Nussbaum, p.c. to Michael Weiss);⁵⁰ but that must have been the original ending,
because that is the only way to explain the e-grade vowel of the Oscan thematic loc.
sg. -eí (in nominal forms the thematic vowel is e-grade when there is no ending, as
in the voc. sg.). The high front vocalic in the attested ending must originally have
been the hic-et-nunc particle ∗-i (see above). Most daughter languages seem not to
have preserved even the extended ending ∗-ey, regularizing it to ∗-oy, though Hitt.
dat.-loc. sg. -i and Indo-Iranian loc. sg. ∗-ai might reflect the older diphthong.
⁴⁸ This is the ending expected by Szemerényi’s Law < ∗∗-oms. For possible evidence of the survival
of ∗ ˉo (at least) in this ending in PIE, see Kim (2012b).
⁴⁹ An ending ∗-osyo is also attested in Anatolian (see Melchert 2012a with discussion), but it seems
originally to have been the pronominal ending (see further below).
⁵⁰ Harðarson (1995) instead suggests an athematic loc. sg., the final /-e/ of the Greek form reflecting
the first laryngeal.


===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 51
The ablative case poses unique problems. The Anatolian languages exhibit an
ablative suffix reconstructable as ∗-ti, thematic ∗-o-ti; it is both sg. and pl. (!)
and was almost certainly an adverb-forming suffix. Elsewhere in the IE family
such a suffix appears unambiguously only in Tocharian A, whose ‘secondary’
ablative ending -a¨ṣ, suffixed to the oblique caseform of nouns, can reflect ∗-V-ti
(Jasanoff 1987: 109–10).⁵¹ Anatolian also exhibits a suffix ∗-d, likewise indifferent
to number, which marks the instrumental case of nouns and adjectives but also
appears in Old Hitt. kēt ‘on this side of ’, which might originally have been an abla-
tive (Melchert and Oettinger 2009: 54; but cf. Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 143).
Melchert and Oettinger (2009) suggest that this was the original PIE ablative end-
ing, that it appears also in the Sanskrit pronominal ablatives mát ‘from me’, asmát
‘from us’, etc., and that it is also connected with Core IE thematic abl. sg. ∗-e-ad.
But the last is a transparent innovation (see below). The similarity of Old Hitt. kēt
and the Sanskrit pronominal forms, and the fact that ∗-d is indifferent to number
in both daughters, are much more striking; but the identification of kēt as an abla-
tive is not secure, and it is possible that the Sanskrit forms are innovations using
the only unambiguous ablative ending that the language possessed. Note also that,
except for ∗-e-ad, reconstructable Core IE has no distinctive ablative endings at
all for its nouns or adjectives.⁵² Under the circumstances I hesitate to reconstruct
any ablative endings for PIE, though it seems probable that the language had an
ablative case.
The evidence for inst. pl. ∗-is is much better. Jasanoff (2009: 141–2) adduces
Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin adverbs in -is that are plausibly fossilized caseforms;
a number of the longer Core IE inst. pl. endings also end in -is (see below); and
Joshua Katz has plausibly explained the PGmc pronominal dative ending ∗-iz as
an inst. pl. ending (cf. Katz 1998: 118–21). Like inst. sg. ∗-éh₁ ~ ∗-h₁, inst. pl. ∗-is
appears to be an inherited case ending, parallel to dat. pl. ∗-os. Apparently those
endings were replaced by ∗-d, which might originally have been an adverb-forming
suffix, in Anatolian. That may seem surprising, but as we will see below, various
endings were also replaced by adverbial suffixes in Core IE languages.
Because Tocharian lost much of its inherited case system (before constructing
a new system by the accretion of postpositions), it is unclear how much change
had occurred in the Nuclear IE system. For the reconstruction of Core IE we have
abundant material but widespread disagreement among the daughters on some
points. The nature of the problem can be seen by comparing the athematic dat. pl.
and inst. pl. endings of various daughters:
⁵¹ The -a¨-of this ending, like most of the initial vowels of Toch. A secondary case endings, can reflect
resegmentation of an originally stem-final vowel; that is why I suggest that only ∗-ti is inherited (fol-
lowing Jasanoff 2009: 139) rather than connecting the entire ending with PIE ∗éti ‘further, in addition’
(with Melchert and Oettinger 2009: 57).
⁵² An ending ∗-im appears in Latin adverbs such as illim ‘from there’ and in the Luvian ablatives
of demonstrative pronouns zin, apin (Melchert and Oettinger 2009: 55–6), but it is not clear whether
it became an actual case ending in any language but Luvian. Whether it is the source of the ∗-m- in
Nuclear IE dat.-abl. pl. ∗-mos (see below) is also unclear.


===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
52 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
dat. pl. instr. pl.
Latin -bus < ∗-bʰos —
Old Irish -ib < ∗-bʰis (originally
the inst. pl.)
Gothic -m < ∗ -mos and/or∗-mis
(the latter inst. pl.)
Greek (replaced by loc. pl.) (Hom. adv. -φι,) Mycenaean -pi <
∗-bʰi
Armenian (replaced by gen. pl.) -wkʰ < ∗-bʰi + particle
OCS -mŭ < ∗ -mos or ∗ -mus -mi < ∗-mī(s)
OLith. -mus < ∗ -mus -mìs < ∗-mīs
Sanskrit -bʰyas < ∗-bʰyos -bʰis < ∗-bʰis
Avestan -biiˉo < ∗-bʰyos -biš < ∗-bʰis
Though the resemblances are obvious, the details differ from subgroup to sub-
group. Most of the daughters seem to have preserved dat. pl. ∗-os and inst. pl. ∗-is
in some form, but they have inserted labial consonants between those endings and
the stem. The source of ∗-bʰ- is clearly the adverb-forming suffix ∗-bʰí (Jasanoff
2009: 139; cf. Melchert and Oettinger 2009: 63–4); the latter has actually been
pressed into service as a case ending in Greek and Armenian, and there is a possi-
ble Tocharian relic in Toch. B ṣp ‘and’ < ∗se-bʰi ‘with it’ (Ringe 2002). The source of
∗-m- is less clear; Melchert and Oettinger (2009: 62–3) suggest an adverbial end-
ing, while Katz’s discussion of Tocharian and Anatolian pronouns suggests that
dat. pl. ∗-mos contains the ∗-m- of the stressed oblique pronoun suffix ∗-mé and
might actually survive in enclitic plural (all persons) Toch. B -me, A -m (cf. Katz
1998: 154–66, 243–5, 248–51 with fn. 60). It is also unclear what system should be
reconstructed for Core IE. For the sake of concreteness I suggest the following set
of athematic nominal endings for Core IE (given in an order which takes account
of the syncretisms among them):
singular plural dual
vocative -0 ∗ -es, neuter ∗-h₂ ∗-h e,₁ neuter ∗-ih₁
nominative ∗-s ~ -0, neuter -0 ∗ -es, neuter ∗-h₂ ∗-h₁e, neuter ∗-ih₁
accusative ∗ -m, neuter -0 ∗ -ns, neuter ∗-h₂ ∗-h₁e, neuter ∗-ih₁
instrumental ∗-éh₁ ~ ∗-h₁ ∗-bʰís ∗-bʰV́ H or ∗-mV́ H
dative ∗-éy ∗-mós ∗-b Vʰ ́H or ∗-mV ́H
ablative ∗-és ~ ∗ -s ~ ∗ -os ∗-mós ∗-bʰV́ H or ∗-mV́ H
genitive ∗-és ~ ∗ -s ~ ∗ -os ∗-óHom ∗-ów(s) (∗-óHs ?)⁵³
locative -0´ ∗-sú ∗-ów(s)
⁵³ This reconstruction rests on the Avestan ending -å, which (if inherited) would reflect Proto-Indo-
Iranian ∗-ās; Avestan distinguishes the gen. du. from the loc. du. in -oˉ, which might reflect Proto-Indo-
Iranian ∗-au, to judge from Old Lith. dvíejau ‘in two’ (cf. Tichy 2006: 68, Beekes 2011: 217). But Sanskrit
has -os, apparently < Proto-Indo-Iranian ∗-aus, for both endings, and OCS has -u < Proto-Balto-Slavic


===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 53
The function of the inherited allative had been taken over by the accusative. If the
above reconstruction is correct, it implies that ∗-bʰ- (or, in Indo-Iranian, ∗-bʰy-)
spread at the expense of ∗-m- in most daughters, but ∗-m- spread at the expense of
∗-bʰ- in Balto-Slavic and Germanic. The reconstruction of the inst.-dat.-abl. dual
ending is indeterminate because the only endings of the daughters that agree even
approximately are OCS -ma and Av. -biia (Skt -bʰyā́ m with an added particle);
the vowel of the ending must have been ∗ o or ∗a, but any laryngeal could have
followed, and it is unclear what the initial consonant of the ending was.
Note the widespread incidence of syncretism in this system.⁵⁴ Though recon-
struction of the dual endings is difficult, it seems clear that no more than three
or four can be reconstructed; of course it is not surprising that syncretism was
most extensive in the most ‘marked’ of the numbers. The nom. pl. and voc. pl.
were always identical, as were the dat. pl. and abl. pl.; the abl. sg. and gen. sg.
were also identical—so that the ablative did not have a distinctive ending in any
number, though the pattern of syncretisms still distinguished it as a separate case.
Most strikingly of all, though the neuter exhibited endings in the three direct
cases (nom., acc., and voc.) that were largely different from those of the mascu-
line and feminine, there was only one neuter ending for all three cases in each of
the numbers. That pattern of syncretism in the neuter persisted in almost all the
daughters for as long as each still distinguished a neuter gender and nominative
and accusative cases. The other syncretisms also had a significant impact on the
development of the case-marking system in the daughters.
The thematic endings diverged from the athematic endings to a greater extent
in Core IE than they had in PIE:
singular plural dual
vocative ∗ -e, neuter ∗ -o-m ∗ -o-es, neuter ∗-a-h₂ ∗-o-h₁, neuter ∗-o-y(h₁)
nominative ∗ -o-s, neuter ∗ -o-m ∗ -o-es, neuter ∗-a-h₂ ∗-o-h₁, neuter ∗-o-y(h₁)
accusative ∗ -o-m, neuter ∗ -o-m ∗ -o-ns, neuter ∗-a-h₂ ∗-o-h₁, neuter ∗-o-y(h₁)
instrumental ∗-o-h₁ ∗ -ˉoys ∗-oh₁-bʰVH or
∗-oh₁-mVH ?
dative ∗ -o-ey ∗ -oy-mos ∗-oh₁-bʰVH or
∗-oh₁-mVH ?
∗-au(s) for both; so the likelihood of a non-accidental syncretism arising twice independently must be
weighed against the likelihood that Avestan has innovated, introducing an ending of unclear origin.
Fortunately the question is unimportant for the prehistory of Greek.
⁵⁴ Throughout this book I use the term ‘syncretism’ in a purely descriptive sense: it designates a
situation in which forms with different syntactic features exhibit the same inflectional markers. It
does not imply that there was ever a time at which different inflectional markers were used. I dis-
tinguish syncretism from the syntactic merger of morphosyntactic categories, in which one category
takes over all the functions of another, regardless of inflectional marking. For instance, in Latin the
instrumental case has undergone syntactic merger with the ablative, and the dative and ablative cases
exhibit syncretism in the plural—as they did already in PIE, the earliest reconstructable ancestor of
Latin.


===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
54 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
ablative ∗-e-ad ∗ -oy-mos ∗-oh₁-bʰVH or ∗-oh₁-mVH ?
genitive ∗ -o-syo ∗-o-oHom ∗-oy-ow(s) ? (∗-oy-oHs ?)
locative ∗ -e-y ∗ -oy-su ∗-oy-ow(s) ?
The following especially call for comment:
1) The thematic abl. sg. had a distinctive ending, but it was obviously just the
(original) endingless loc. sg. in ∗-e⁵⁵ plus the adverb (postposition?) ∗ád
(> Lat. ad ‘to, at’, OE æt ‘at’), which clearly did not mean ‘to’ in pre-PIE
(Kim 2012a: 123 fn. 4). This is yet another indication that the case system
of PIE and its daughters developed partly by the accretion of postpositions
or adverbs.
2) The gen. sg. of thematic nouns is problematic. Proto-Tocharian ∗-nsë is of
obscure origin; Italo-Celtic exhibits an ending ∗-ī, which appears to be an
unanalyzable derivational morpheme (cf. Nussbaum 1975, Melchert 2014b:
268 with references), though Old Latin also exhibits -osio, and there are
other Continental Celtic endings as well; the Central daughters seem to have
generalized ∗-osyo, which I have therefore entered in the table of endings
above. It is clear that ∗-osyo was originally the pronominal ending, a fact
which fits with the following.
3) Before the consonant-initial loc. pl. ending ∗-su and dat.-abl. pl. ∗-mos, the-
matic stems seem to have exhibited an element ∗-y- which was homonymous
with the pronominal masc. nom. pl. ending and was certainly imported
from pronominal inflection. Jasanoff (2009: 145–8) argues convincingly
that inst. pl. ∗ -ˉoys reflects earlier ∗∗-oy-is (by Stang’s Law), and that the
ultimate source of the element ∗-y- was an inherited collective ∗tóy ‘that
(group)’ which was coopted for the masc. nom. pl. of the distal deictic
(see 2.3.6 (ii)).
Whether there was any similar element before the oblique dual endings is not clear.
I have reconstructed ∗ -oy- for the gen.-loc. and ∗-oh₁- for the inst.-dat.-abl. because
that is what the Indo-Iranian evidence suggests, and it is clear that Indo-Iranian
has preserved the distribution of ∗-oy- in the plural best of all the daughters; but
there is no guarantee that any daughter has not innovated in the dual, and my
reconstruction should not be taken too seriously.
Note what had happened by the Core IE period to the collectives that had orig-
inally functioned as the plurals of neuter nouns. Though their suffix ∗-h₂ was
originally derivational, and was thus part of the stem, in neut. pl. function it had
⁵⁵ This seems to me more likely than an instrumental plus a postposition (suggested by Melchert
and Oettinger 2009: 62). On the possible relation of ∗ád to other ablative endings, see the discussion
above.


===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 55
become restricted to the nom.-acc.-voc.—that is, it had become an inflectional
ending—and the non-neut. pl. endings of the other cases had been extended to
cover neut. plurals as well (cf. Jasanoff 2009: 144–5). The same pattern appears
in Hittite, but the relatively large number of Hittite neuter a-stem nouns attested
only as collectives (Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 82–3) suggests that that was at
least partly a parallel development rather than a shared inheritance. However,
it seems likely that in some athematic stems—at least in n-, r-, and r/n-stems—
the collective suffix had already been reanalyzed as an ending at the PIE stage.
Apparently the addition of collective ∗-h₂ triggered the accent and ablaut pat-
tern typical of the direct cases of amphikinetic nominals (on which see below);
for instance, the collective of ∗wódr̥ ‘water’ was ∗∗wédor-h₂ > PIE ∗wédˉor ‘the
waters’ (Schindler 1975a: 3–4; cf. Nussbaum 2014: 278–80 for possible nuances of
meaning), that of ∗h₁nḗh₃mn̥ ‘name’ was ∗∗h₁néh₃mon-h₂ > ∗h₁nóh₃mˉo ‘nomen-
clature’ (or perhaps ‘pair of names, full name’, Nussbaum 2014: 297–8), and so on.
It seems clear that a full amphikinetic inflection was constructed to those forms,
and since the collective suffix had already become opaque (by Szemerényi’s Law,
see above) in PIE, it is likely that the reanalysis of collectives as plurals occurred
in the protolanguage.
Neuter plural subjects must nevertheless have continued to trigger singular con-
cord with the verb, as their ancestors the collectives had done, because that rule
of concord still operates in attested Hittite, Gāthā-Avestan, and Attic Greek (see
e.g. Fortson 2010: 158 for some attested examples). For further discussion of this
complex of problems, and its possible relationship to feminine gender in IE, see
Neri and Schuhmann (2014).
2.3.4 (ii) Accent and ablaut patterns
Like athematic verb stems, athematic nouns exhibited accent and ablaut alter-
nations within the paradigm; but it is clear that the system of alternations was
originally more elaborate in noun inflection. A comprehensive summary of the
communis opinio can be found in Rieken (1999a); I here present only an outline of
the system. It is necessary to distinguish between monosyllabic athematic nouns,
traditionally called ‘root nouns’ (even when they are not derived from verb roots),
and polysyllabic athematic nouns.
Monosyllables exhibited two types of accent and ablaut alternations. The easier
type to reconstruct, because it has survived robustly in Indo-Iranian and Greek
(and even become productive in the latter language), exhibited alternating accent:
on the root in the direct cases, but on the endings in the oblique cases. Typical
examples include (masc.) ∗h₂nér- ~ ∗h₂nr- ‘man’, (fem.) ∗wráh₂d- ~ ∗ wr̥ h₂d- ‘root’,
(neut.) ∗ḱḗr (< ∗∗ḱérd) ~ ∗ḱr̥ d- ‘heart’.
But there was also a type which had the accent on the root in all forms, but exhib-
ited an ablaut alternation between the direct and oblique cases; this ‘acrostatic’
type was recognized only in the 1960s, because it was already being eliminated


===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
56 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
by morphological change in PIE and has to be reconstructed from relics in the
daughters (cf. Schindler 1967c, 1972a). Fairly clear examples of acrostatic mono-
syllables include (fem.) ∗dóm- ~ ∗dém- ‘house’ (whose archaic gen. sg. is well
attested in reflexes of the fossilized phrase ∗déms pótis ‘master of the house’),
∗nókʷt- ~ ∗nékʷt- ‘night’, (neut.) ∗h₂óst ~ ∗h₂ást- ‘bone’, ∗mḗms ~ ∗méms- ‘meat’.
Sometimes it is difficult to determine whether a noun was originally acrostatic
from the reconstructable pattern of inflection. For instance, from (masc.) nom. sg.
∗pṓds, acc. sg. ∗pódm̥ , gen. sg. ∗pedés, etc., ‘foot’, should we conclude that the orig-
inal inflection was acrostatic ∗pód- ~ ∗péd- and that the noun has been transferred
into the alternating type without adjustment of the root-ablaut, or is it likelier that
an inconvenient oblique stem ∗pd- was replaced by ∗ped- (a process for which
probable parallels can be cited)?
Polysyllabic nouns seem originally to have exhibited four different accent pat-
terns (cf. Schindler 1975b: 262–4). Acrostatic polysyllables survive much better
than acrostatic monosyllables, though their ablaut alternations are usually leveled
in the daughters; representative examples include (masc.) ∗mḗh₁n̥ s- ~ ∗méh₁n̥ s-
‘moon’, (fem.) ∗h₂ówi- ~ ∗h₂áwi- ‘sheep’, (neut.) ∗h₁nḗh₃mn̥ ~ ∗h₁nóh₃mn- ‘name’
(∗/-é-/), ∗Hyḗkʷr̥ ~ ∗Hyékʷn- ‘liver’, ∗ósr̥ ~ ∗ésn- ‘autumn’, ∗ wā́ stu ~ ∗wástu- ‘set-
tlement’. Moreover, in late PIE there developed a new class of neuter s-stems with
root-accent but clearly secondary ablaut (involving multiple full-grade syllables),
and that type seems to have become productive; typical examples are ∗nébʰos ~
∗nébʰes- ‘cloud’, ∗ḱléwos ~ ∗ḱléwes- ‘fame’, ∗ǵénh₁os ~ ∗ǵénh₁es- ‘lineage’, etc.
The other three polysyllabic types exhibited alternating accent: on the leftmost
syllable of the stem in the direct cases and on the endings in the oblique cases
(‘amphikinetic’ accent); on the rightmost syllable of the stem in the direct cases
and on the endings in the oblique cases (‘hysterokinetic’ accent); or on the penul-
timate syllable of the stem in the direct cases and on the rightmost syllable of the
stem in the oblique cases (‘proterokinetic’ accent). Note that in every one of these
patterns the accent was to the left in the direct cases and to the right in the oblique
cases.
The amphikinetic type appears to be the most archaic; isolated examples survive
only in Hittite and the Indo-Iranian languages. Securely reconstructable amphiki-
netic nouns include, for instance, (masc.) ∗póntoh₂- ~ ∗ pn̥ th₂- ‘path’,⁵⁶ ∗léymon-
⁵⁶ I here follow de Vaan (2008) s.v. pˉons. An alternative reconstruction is ∗péntoh₂-; Neri (2009: 7)
suggests that it was an ‘individuative’ formed to a collective in ∗-h₂, which in turn was formed to a basic
acrostatic noun ∗pónt- ~ ∗pént- which survives in OCS pǫtĭ and in Lat. pˉons ‘bridge’. If that is true, the
range of reference of the ultimate derivative and the base noun must have overlapped substantially—
both could, in effect, mean ‘path’. But in that case the ablaut grade of the basic noun’s direct cases could
easily have spread to the ultimate derivative by lexical analogy; the latter would then be ∗póntoh₂- ~
∗ pn̥ th₂-´. If that is what happened, we cannot be sure that any reflex of the original base noun survives,
since all the attested forms (including Old Prussian pintis, with a zero-grade root) can reflect ∗póntoh₂-
~ ∗ pn̥ th₂-´. This is a good example of the tension between theory and evidence, and of the way that
the attested evidence can underdetermine a reconstruction.


===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 57
~ ∗limn- ‘lake’, (fem.) ∗dʰéǵʰˉom ~ ∗ǵʰm- (loc. ∗dʰǵʰém) ‘earth’, and neuter col-
lectives such as ∗wédˉor ~ ∗udn- ‘waters’ (cf. Schindler 1975a: 3–4). Interestingly,
the inflection of masculine n-stems in Germanic appears to have evolved from an
originally amphikinetic pattern (cf. Jasanoff 2002: 32–5), which suggests that this
type of inflection had not yet been reduced to relics in Central IE.
Hysterokinetic inflection is most familiar from the r-stem kinship terms, e.g.
∗ph₂tér- ~ ∗ph₂tr- ‘father’, ∗dʰugh₂tér- ~ ∗dʰugtr- (with laryngeal lost, see 2.2.4
(i)) ‘daughter’. But it seems clear that there were also a good many hysterokinetic
n-stems, such as ∗poh₂imén- ~ ∗poh₂imn- ‘shepherd’, ∗uksén- ~ ∗uksn- ‘bull’, and
other hysterokinetic stems can be reconstructed, e.g. ∗dn̥ ǵʰwáh₂- ~ ∗dn̥ ǵʰuh₂-
‘tongue’ (Peters 1991).
Proterokinetic inflection may have been the most widespread type among
polysyllabic athematic nouns in Core IE. Whole classes of nouns followed this
accent paradigm, including, for instance, feminine nouns in ∗/-tey-/⁵⁷ (e.g.
∗dʰéh₁-ti- ~ ∗dʰh₁-téy- ‘act of putting’, ∗ gʷém-ti- ~ ∗ gʷm̥ -téy- ‘step, act of walking’,
∗mén-ti- ~ ∗ mn̥ -téy- ‘thought’), masculine nouns in ∗/-tew-/ (e.g. ∗ǵéws-tu-
~ ∗ǵus-téw- ‘taste’), most neuters in ∗/-men-/ (e.g. ∗séh₁-mn̥ ~ ∗sh₁-mén- ‘seed’),
most feminines in ∗-h₂- that were not derived from o-stems (e.g. ∗ gʷénh₂- ~
∗ gʷnáh₂- ‘woman’, ∗h₁widʰéwh₂- ~ ∗h₁widʰwáh₂- ‘widow’), and a large number
of neuter r/n-stems (e.g. ∗páh₂wr̥ ~ ∗ph₂uén- ‘fire’; cf. Schindler 1975a: 9–10).
There was a conspicuous group of basic neuter nouns with o-grade direct cases
which were originally acrostatic (Schindler 1975a: 4–8) but are proterokinetic
in the daughters of Core IE, e.g. ∗wódr̥ ~ ∗udén- ‘water’ (but cf. Hitt. inst. sg.
wedand(a) < ∗wéd-n̥ - (Craig Melchert, p.c.)), ∗móri ~ ∗mréy- ‘sea’, ∗ǵónu ~
∗ǵnéw- ‘knee’ (but cf. Hitt. gēnu, Lat. genuˉ), ∗dóru ~ ∗dréw- ‘tree, wood’.
None of this applied to thematic nouns, which had the accent on the same sylla-
ble throughout the paradigm, either on the thematic vowel (e.g. in (masc.) ∗deywós
‘god’, (fem.) ∗snusós ‘daughter-in-law’, (neut.) ∗yugóm ‘yoke’) or on the leftmost
syllable of the stem (e.g. in (masc.) ∗éḱwos ‘horse’, (neut.) ∗wérǵom ‘work’). How-
ever, there was a derivational rule by which collectives were formed from o-stem
nouns by the addition of the collective suffix ∗-h₂- and a shift of accent, so that from
(masc.) ∗kʷékʷlo- ‘wheel’, for example, was formed a collective ∗kʷekʷlá-h₂- ‘set of
wheels’; and in the daughter languages these collectives tended to be reinterpreted
⁵⁷ Lundquist (2015) observes that, though both oxytone and barytone forms of nouns of this class
are attested in Vedic, the oxytone forms are almost invariably older; he suggests that the barytone
forms are innovations and do not constitute evidence for an alternation of accent in this class of nouns.
That might be true (though it needs to be remembered that the subdialects of later Vedic texts are not
necessarily direct descendants of Rigvedic or of each other, so that the traditional interpretation of the
pattern as leveling in different directions is not certainly false). But the reconstruction of nouns of this
class as proterokinetic does not rest solely on the Vedic accent facts; a fossil such as PGmc ∗dēdiz ‘deed’,
with a full-grade root but oxytone accent (to judge from the voiced Verner’s Law alternant of its suffix),
is reasonable evidence for proterokinetic accent in Central IE.


===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
58 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
as neuter plurals and, in some cases, to be integrated into the paradigms of the
nouns from which they had originally been formed. The result was a class of
thematic nouns with an alternation of accent between singular and plural, and
sometimes also a shift of gender in the plural (as in Lat. masc. locus ‘place’, pl. neut.
loca). Various daughters leveled the alternations in different ways; for instance, in
Greek the accent alternation is normally leveled (cf. Homeric masc. κύκλος ‘wheel’,
pl. neut. κύκλα), while in Slavic languages the gender is normally leveled (cf. e.g.
Russian neut. m’ésto ‘place’, pl. m’está).
Finally, feminines (some of which were originally collectives) were also formed
from o-stem nouns with the suffix ∗-h₂-; these, too, had fixed accent (e.g.
∗dʰoHnáh₂- ‘grain’, ∗pĺ̥h₂mah₂- ‘flat hand, palm’).
2.3.4 (iii) Sample Central IE noun paradigms
These are naturally much smaller than the verb paradigms and require less com-
ment. I omit the oblique cases of the dual, whose reconstruction is shaky in any
case. Readers should bear in mind that the plural paradigms given for neuter nouns
were innovations that at least partly postdated PIE. The accent given for voca-
tive forms is the underlying accent dictated by the accent-and-ablaut paradigm;
on the surface vocatives were either accentless or accented on the initial syllable
(see 2.2.5).
night (fem.) foot (masc.) root (fem.) star (masc.) heart (neut.)
singular
nom. nókʷts pṓds wráh₂ds h₂stḗr ḱḗr
voc. nókʷt pód wráh₂d h₂stér ḱḗr
acc. nókʷtm ̥pódm ̥wráh₂dm ̥h₂stérm ̥ḱḗr
inst. nékʷteh₁ pedéh₁ wr ̥h₂déh₁ h₂str ̥éh₁ ḱr ̥déh₁
dat. nékʷtey pedéy wr ̥h₂déy h₂str ̥éy ḱr ̥déy
abl.-gen. nékʷts pedés wr ̥h₂dés h₂str ̥és ḱr ̥dés
loc. nékʷt(i) péd(i) wráh₂d(i) h₂stér(i) ḱḗr(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. nókʷth₁e pódh₁e wráh₂dh₁e h₂stérh₁e ḱérdih₁
…
plural
nom.-voc. nókʷtes pódes wráh₂des h₂stéres ḱérdh₂ (?)
acc. nókʷtn ̥s pódn ̥s wráh₂dn ̥s h₂stérn ̥s ḱérdh₂ (?)
inst. nékʷtbʰis pedbʰís wr ̥h₂dbʰís h₂str ̥bʰís ḱr ̥dbʰís
dat.-abl. nékʷtm ̥os pedmós wr ̥h₂dr ̥ós h₂str ̥mós ḱr ̥dmós
gen. nékʷtoHom pedóHom wr ̥h₂dóHom h₂str ̥óHom ḱr ̥dóHom
loc. nékʷtsu pedsú wr ̥h₂dsú h₂str ̥sú ḱr ̥dsú


===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 59
moon, (collective:)
sheep (fem.) month (masc.) name (neut.) names (neut.) lake (masc.)
singular
nom. h₂ówis mḗh₁n ̥s h₁nḗh₃mn ̥h₁nóh₃moˉ léymoˉ
voc. h₂ówey mḗh₁n ̥s h₁nḗh₃mn ̥h₁nóh₃moˉ léymon
acc. h₂ówim mḗh₁n ̥sm ̥h₁nḗh₃mn ̥h₁nóh₃moˉ léymonm ̥
inst. h₂áwih₁ méh₁n ̥seh₁ h₁nóh₃mn ̥eh₁ h₁n ̥h₃mnéh₁⁵⁸ limnéh₁
dat. h₂áwyey méh₁n ̥sey h₁nóh₃mn ̥ey h₁n ̥h₃mnéy limnéy
abl.-gen. h₂áwis méh₁n ̥sos h₁nóh₃mn ̥(o)s h₁n ̥h₃mnés limnés
(→ -yos)
loc. ??? méh₁n ̥s(i) h₁nóh₃mn ̥(i) h₁n ̥h₃mén(i) limén(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. h₂ówih₁e mḗh₁n ̥sh₁e h₁nḗh₃mn ̥ih₁ (?) léymonh₁e
…
plural
nom.-voc. h₂óweyes mḗh₁n ̥ses léymones
acc. h₂ówins mḗh₁n ̥ ̥sn s léymonn ̥s
inst. h áwib₂ʰis méh₁n ̥sbʰis limn ̥b ísʰ
dat.-abl. h₂áwimos méh₁n ̥smos limn ̥mós
gen. h₂áwyoHom méh₁n ̥soHom limnóHom
loc. h₂áwisu méh₁n ̥su limn ̥sú
⁵⁸ The evidence of the daughters suggests that ∗m was non-syllabic in this and the following two
forms; see 2.2.4 (ii) ad fin.


===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
60 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
earth (fem.) thought (fem.) taste (masc.) sea (neut.) tree (neut.)
singular
nom. dʰéǵʰˉom méntis ǵéwstus móri dóru
voc. dʰéǵʰom méntey ǵéwstew móri dóru
acc. dʰéǵʰˉom méntim ǵéwstum móri dóru
inst. ǵʰméh₁ mn ̥tíh₁ ?⁵⁹ ǵustúh₁ ?⁶⁰ mriéh₁ ? druéh₁ ?
(mn ̥tyéh₁?) (ǵustuéh₁?)
dat. ǵʰméy mn ̥téyey ǵustéwey mréyey dréwey
abl.-gen. ǵʰmés mn ̥téys ǵustéws mréys dréws
loc. dʰǵʰém(i) mn ̥téy (-ēy) ǵustéw(i) mréy (-ēy) dréw(i)
dual
nom.-voc.-acc. méntih₁ ǵéwstuh₁ mórīh₁ (?) dórwih₁
…
plural
nom.-voc. ménteyes ǵéwstewes mórih₂ dóruh₂
acc. méntins ǵéwstuns mórih₂ dóruh₂
inst. mn ̥tíbʰis ǵustúbʰis mríbʰis drúbʰis
dat.-abl. mn ̥tímos ǵustúmos mrímos drúmos
gen. mn ̥téyoHom ǵustéwoHom mréyoHom dréwoHom
loc. mn ̥tísu ǵustúsu mrísu drúsu
⁵⁹ The expected form is of course ∗ mn̥ téyh₁, but no reflex of such a form is attested. Potential Vedic
reflexes of both endings suggested here are attested, in fact for this word (matɩ̄́ and matyā́ ). The former
is clearly an archaism, appearing in the stereotyped cvi-formation (Schindler 1980: 391), though it is
unclear how far back the ending goes in proterokinetic stems; it must have originated in acrostatic
stems (Schindler 1975a: 4–5, 1975b: 262, Mayrhofer 1989: 15). For similar evidence of the relative
antiquity of inst. sg. -vā́ in proterokinetic u-stems, see e.g. Nussbaum (2010: 271) with references. The
productive proterokinetic endings -yā́ , -vā́ can have been favored by the obvious parallel with thematic
-ā < ∗-oh₁; for that reason I hesitate to project ∗-éh₁ back into Core IE proterokinetic i- and u-stems
(pace Neri 2009: 7). I am grateful to Ronald Kim for helpful discussion of these points and those in the
next footnote.
⁶⁰ Vedic exhibits only inst. sg. forms in -vā ~ -uā (and innovative -unā) for u-stems, but -uˉ is attested
in Gāthā-Avestan in vohuˉ ‘good’, xratuˉ ‘(spiritual) power’, the latter replaced in younger Avestan by
xraθβā; it is reasonable to suspect that i-stems and u-stems developed in a parallel fashion and to
reconstruct ∗-úh₁ (with caution) for Core IE.


===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 61
(collective:)
seed seed(s) sun woman widow
(neut.) (neut.) (neut.)⁶¹ (fem.) (fem.)
singular
nom. séh₁mn̥ séh₁mˉo sáh₂wl̥ gʷḗn h₁widʰéwh₂
voc. séh₁mn̥ séh₁mˉo sáh₂wl̥ gʷḗn h₁widʰéwh₂
acc. séh₁mn̥ séh₁mˉo sáh₂wl̥ gʷénh₂m̥ h₁widʰéwh₂m̥
inst. sh₁m̥ énh₁ sh₁m̥ néh₁ sh₂uéneh₁ gʷnáh₂h₁⁶² h₁widʰwáh₂h₁
dat. sh₁m̥ éney sh₁m̥ néy sh₂uéney gʷnáh₂ay h₁widʰwáh₂ay
abl.-gen. sh₁m̥ éns sh₁m̥ nés sh₂uéns gʷnáh₂s h₁widʰwáh₂s
loc. sh₁m̥ én(i) sh₁m̥ én(i) sh₂uén(i) gʷnáh₂(i) h₁widʰwáh₂(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. séh₁mn̥ ih₁ gʷénh₂h₁e h₁widʰéwh₂h₁e
…
plural
nom.-voc. gʷénh₂as h₁widʰéwh₂as
acc. gʷénh₂n̥ s h₁widʰéwh₂n̥ s
inst. gʷnáh₂bʰis h₁widʰwáh₂bʰis
dat.-abl. gʷnáh₂mos h₁widʰwáh₂mos
gen. gʷnáh₂oHom h₁widʰwáh₂oHom
loc. gʷnáh₂su h₁widʰwáh₂su
⁶¹ A preform ∗sóh₂wl̥ might be suggested by Lat. solˉ (masc.), but the latter more likely reflects ∗sh₂uṓl
← derived amphikinetic ∗sáh₂wˉol (Neri 2003: 232, Melchert 2014b: 263 fn. 8; I am grateful to Michael
Weiss for calling this to my attention). Gatha-Avestan gen. sg. xvǝ¯ṇg < ∗sh₂uéns virtually guarantees
that the basic noun was proterokinetic, and Vedic Skt súar guarantees that it was neuter.
⁶² Such a form, ending in two laryngeals, seems improbable; but in Germanic a disyllable would have
yielded a trimoric vowel which would not have become the ∗-u which is reconstructable for Northwest
Germanic. PGmc ∗-ˉo (bimoric), reflected in Early Runic dat. sg. -u (Krause 1971: 117) and OHG dat.
sg. -u, must reflect a single syllable with a syllable-final laryngeal, and if the inst. sg. ending was not
simply lost after the suffix ∗-ah₂, we apparently need to reconstruct ∗-ah₂-h₁ for this ending.


===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
62 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
father bull dog tooth tongue (masc.)
(masc.) (masc.) (masc.) (masc.)
singular
nom. ph₂tḗr uksḗn ḱwṓ h₁dónts dn ̥ǵʰwáh₂s
voc. ph₂tér uksén ḱwón h₁dónd dn ̥ǵʰwáh₂
acc. ph₂térm ̥uksénm ̥ḱwónm ̥h₁dóntm ̥dn ̥ǵʰwa ̄́m
inst. ph₂tr ̥éh₁ uksn ̥éh₁ ḱunéh₁ h₁dn ̥téh₁ dn ̥ǵʰuh₂áh₁
dat. ph₂tr ̥éy uksn ̥éy ḱunéy h₁dn ̥téy dn ̥ǵʰuh₂áy
abl.-gen. ph₂tr ̥és uksn ̥és ḱunés h₁dn ̥tés dn ̥ǵʰuh₂ás
loc. ph₂tér(i) uksén(i) ḱwén(i) (?) h₁dént(i) (?) dn ̥ǵʰwáh₂(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. ph₂térh₁e uksénh₁e ḱwónh₁e h₁dónth₁e dn ̥ǵʰwáh₂h₁e
…
plural
nom.-voc. ph₂téres uksénes ḱwónes h₁dóntes dn ̥ǵʰwáh₂as
acc. ph₂térn ̥s uksénn ̥s ḱwónn ̥s h₁dóntn ̥s dn ̥ǵʰwa ̄́s
inst. ph₂tr ̥bʰís uksn ̥bʰís ḱwn ̥bʰís h₁dn ̥tbʰís dn ̥ǵʰuh₂bʰís
dat.-abl. ph₂tr ̥mós uksn ̥mós ḱwn ̥mós h₁dn ̥tmós dn ̥ǵʰuh₂mós
gen. ph₂tr ̥óHom uksn ̥óHom ḱunóHom h₁dn ̥tóHom dn ̥ǵʰuh₂óHom
loc. ph₂tr̥ sú uksn̥ sú ḱwn̥ sú h₁dn̥ tsú dn̥ ǵʰuh₂sú
field (masc.) nest (masc.) work (neut.) yoke (neut.) cloud (neut.)
singular
nom. h₂áǵros nisdós wérǵom yugóm nébʰos
voc. h₂áǵre nisdé wérǵom yugóm nébʰos
acc. h₂áǵrom nisdóm wérǵom yugóm nébʰos
inst. h₂áǵroh₁ nisdóh₁ wérǵoh₁ yugóh₁ nébʰeseh₁
dat. h₂áǵroey nisdóey wérǵoey yugóey nébʰesey
abl. h₂áǵread nisdéad wérǵead yugéad nébʰesos
gen. h₂áǵrosyo nisdósyo wérǵosyo yugósyo nébʰesos
loc. h₂áǵrey nisdéy wérǵey yugéy nébʰes(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. h₂áǵroh₁ nisdóh₁ wérǵoyh₁ yugóyh₁ nébʰesih₁
…
plural
nom.-voc. h₂áǵroes nisdóes wérǵah₂ yugáh₂ nébʰˉos
acc. h₂áǵrons nisdóns wérǵah₂ yugáh₂ nébʰˉos
inst. h₂áǵrˉoys nisdṓys wérǵˉoys yugṓys nébʰesbʰis
dat.-abl. h₂áǵroymos nisdóymos wérǵoymos yugóymos nébʰesmos
gen. h₂áǵrˉoHom nisdṓHom wérǵˉoHom yugṓHom nébʰesoHom
loc. h₂áǵroysu nisdóysu wérǵoysu yugóysu nébʰesu


===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 63
palm (fem.) grain (fem.)
singular plural
nom. pĺh̥₂mah₂ dʰoHnáh₂ pĺh̥₂mah₂as dʰoHnáh₂as
voc. pĺh̥₂ma dʰoHná pĺh̥₂mah₂as dʰoHnáh₂as
acc. pĺh̥₂mām dʰoHna ̄́m pĺh̥₂mās dʰoHna ̄́s
inst. pĺh̥₂mah₂h₁ dʰoHnáh₂h₁ pĺh̥₂mah₂bʰis dʰoHnáh₂bʰis
dat. pĺh̥₂mah₂ay dʰoHnáh₂ay pĺh̥₂mah₂mos dʰoHnáh₂mos
gen. pĺh̥₂mah₂s dʰoHnáh₂s pĺh̥₂mah₂oHom dʰoHnáh₂oHom
loc. pĺh̥₂mah₂(i) dʰoHnáh₂(i) pĺh̥₂mah₂su dʰoHnáh₂su
(See 2.2.4 (iv) on the phonology of the vocative and accusative forms.) As usual,
the ablative was identical with the genitive in the singular and the dative in the
plural. The dual direct cases of these stems seem to have ended in ∗-ah₂-ih₁.
2.3.5 PIE adjective inflection
In principle adjectives were inflected like nouns, except that there were forms for
each of the three genders. The masculine and neuter case-and-number forms were
made directly to the adjective stem (and were therefore identical in the oblique
cases). In Nuclear IE the feminine was characterized by a suffix, which was ∗-h₂- for
o-stems and apparently ∗/-yeh₂-/ (proterokinetic) for all athematic adjectives. The
large and productive classes of adjectives were o-stems, u-stems (proterokinetic),
active participles in ∗/-ont-/ (hysterokinetic) made to athematic verb stems and in
∗-o-nt- (with fixed accent) made to thematic verb stems, and perfect participles in
∗/-wos-/ (probably originally amphikinetic, but perhaps mostly hysterokinetic in
Core IE).


===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
64 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
The following paradigms were typical:
‘thin’ (u-stem, proterokinetic; the ∗a’s are underlyingly ∗/e/)
masc. neut. fem.
singular
nom. ténh₂us ténh₂u tn̥ h₂áwih₂
voc. ténh₂u ténh₂u tn̥ h₂áwi
acc. ténh₂um ténh₂u tn̥ h₂áwih₂m̥
inst. tn̥ h₂uéh₁ ? tn̥ h₂wih₂áh₁ ?⁶³
dat. tn̥ h₂áwey tn̥ h₂uyáh₂ay
abl.-gen. tn̥ h₂áws tn̥ h₂uyáh₂s
loc. tn̥ h₂áw(i) tn̥ h₂uyáh₂(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. ténh₂uh₁ ténh₂uih₁ ???
…
plural
nom.-voc. ténh₂awes ténh₂uh₂ tn̥ h₂áwih₂es
acc. ténh₂uns ténh₂uh₂ tn̥ h₂áwih₂n̥ s
inst. tn̥ h₂úbʰis tn̥ h₂uyáh₂bʰis
dat.-abl. tn̥ h₂úmos tn̥ h₂uyáh₂mos
gen. tn̥ h₂áwoHom tn̥ h₂uyáh₂oHom
loc. tn̥ h₂úsu tn̥ h₂uyáh₂su
⁶³ I here follow the suggestion of Jochem Schindler apud Jasanoff (2003a: 102; noted by Neri
2009: 7); it is supported indirectly by the ā-stem endings of Vedic and OCS (see Jasanoff ’s discussion
for details). Of course it is not guaranteed for Core IE, since Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic together
represent only part of the Central IE subgroup, but we have even less evidence for any alternative.


===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 65
‘being’ (active participle, hysterokinetic)⁶⁴
masc. neut. fem.
singular
nom. h₁sónts h₁sónd h₁sóntih₂
voc. h₁sónd h₁sónd h₁sónti
acc. h₁sóntm̥ h₁sónd h₁sóntih₂m̥
inst. h₁sn̥ téh₁ h₁sn̥ tih₂áh₁
dat. h₁sn̥ téy h₁sn̥ tyáh₂ay
abl.-gen. h₁sn̥ tés h₁sn̥ tyáh₂s
loc. h₁sónt(i) h₁sn̥ tyáh₂(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. h₁sónth₁e h₁sóntih₁ h₁sóntih₂h₁e (?)
…
plural
nom.-voc. h₁sóntes h₁sṓnd h₁sóntih₂as
acc. h₁sóntn̥ s h₁sṓnd h₁sóntih₂n̥ s
inst. h₁sn̥ tbʰís h₁sn̥ tyáh₂bʰis
dat.-abl. h₁sn̥ tmós h₁sn̥ tyáh₂mos
gen. h₁sn̥ tóHom h₁sn̥ tyáh₂oHom
loc. h₁sn̥ tsú h₁sn̥ tyáh₂su
⁶⁴ This is the accent paradigm attested in Vedic and reconstructable for Greek. As Craig Melchert
points out (p.c.), o-grade direct cases are unusual in hysterokinetic stems; that suggests that the original
inflection was amphikinetic, though it is nowhere attested.


===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
66 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
‘full’ (o-stem)
masc. neut. fem.
singular
nom. plh̥₁nós plh̥₁nóm plh̥₁náh₂
voc. plh̥₁né plh̥₁nóm plh̥₁ná
acc. plh̥₁nóm plh̥₁nóm plh̥₁na ̄́m
inst. plh̥₁nóh₁ plh̥₁náh₂h₁
dat. plh̥₁nóey plh̥₁náh₂ay
abl. plh̥₁néad plh̥₁náh₂s
gen. plh̥₁nósyo plh̥₁náh₂s
loc. plh̥₁néy plh̥₁náh₂(i)
dual
n.-v.-acc. plh̥₁nóh₁ plh̥₁nóy(h₁) plh̥₁náh₂ih₁ (?)
…
plural
nom.-voc. plh̥₁nóes plh̥₁náh₂ plh̥₁náh₂es
acc. plh̥₁nóns plh̥₁náh₂ plh̥₁na ̄́s
inst. plh̥₁nṓys plh̥₁náh₂bʰis
dat.-abl. plh̥₁nóymos plh̥₁náh₂mos
gen. plh̥₁nṓHom plh̥₁náh₂oHom
loc. plh̥₁nóysu plh̥₁náh₂su
2.3.6 The inflection of other PIE nominals
The remaining classes of nominals that were inflected in PIE included at least
personal pronouns, anaphors, determiners, wh-elements (both interrogative and
relative), and (most) quantifiers. The membership of that list is given in syntac-
tic terms, but the inflectional system classified these stems differently. At least
some quantifiers with relatively general meanings (such as ‘all’ and ‘many’) were
inflected as ordinary adjectives, but others seem to have exhibited pronominal
inflection (see below). Numerals were a more or less distinct inflectional class,
many exhibiting formal peculiarities of one sort or another. The personal pro-
nouns had a reduced inflectional system very unlike that of other nominals.
The remaining items of the above list largely shared inflectional peculiarities;
their system of inflection is usually referred to as ‘pronominal inflection’ by
Indo-Europeanists. In this section I will discuss those inflectional classes.
2.3.6 (i) PIE numerals
It is fairly likely that PIE, like Proto-Algonkian, possessed more than one lexeme
translatable by English ‘one’, though it is not possible to reconstruct the semantics


===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 67
of the words in detail. An obviously archaic m-stem seems likely to have been the
basic numeral (I give the Core IE paradigm):
masc. neut. fem.
nom. sḗm sém sémih₂
voc. sém sém sémi
acc. sḗm sém sémih₂m̥
inst. sméh₁ syáh₂(a)h₁ ? (sih₂áh₁?)
dat. sméy syáh₂ay
abl.-gen. smés syáh₂s
loc. sém(i) syáh₂(i)
The initial ∗sy- of the feminine oblique forms appears to reflect underlying ∗/smy-/
(Gippert 2004 with references); the failure of ∗/m/ to syllabify in this environment
might be another systematic peculiarity in the syllabification of labial sonorants (as
suggested by Gippert; see 2.2.4 (ii)), or it could be a fossilized relic of a pre-PIE
phonological system in which the syllabification rules were different. This word
survives as the ordinary numeral in Tocharian, Greek, Armenian, and probably
Hittite: Hittite sia-(Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 153–5) appears to have been back-
formed to the inherited feminine.⁶⁵ It also obviously underlies the Latin adverb
semel ‘once’. Most of the other languages have instead various derivatives of a stem
∗oy-, which may originally have meant ‘single’ or the like:
Skt ékas < ∗óykos;
Av. aēuuoˉ, OPers. aiva < ∗óywos (cf. Gk οἶος ‘alone’);
Lat. unusˉ, OIr. óen, Welsh un, Goth. ains (and so all the Germanic languages),
Old Prussian ains < ∗óynos (cf. Gk οἴνη ‘one-spot (on dice)’).
It is clear that ‘two’ was inflected as a dual, and that its direct caseform was masc.
∗dwóh₁, neut. ∗dwóy(h₁); it is not clear whether there was originally a separate
feminine stem, though some Central daughters seem to show a fem. direct case-
form ∗dwáh₂ih₁. The oblique forms are difficult to reconstruct, as is usual for duals.
In addition, there was an uninflected form ∗dwó (Cowgill 1985b), which might
have arisen by loss of the direct masc. case ending in pausa (see 2.2.4 (iv) ad fin.).
It is also clear that there was a parallel stem meaning ‘both’ (i.e. ‘all two’), which
either was or ended in ∗bʰó-. But while Germanic seems to reflect such a monosyl-
labic stem (cf. Goth. bai, etc.), the other languages exhibit compounds of various
kinds: the commonest form is compounded with a form of ∗h₂ant- ‘forehead’
(Jasanoff 1976; cf. Toch. B antapi, Toch. A masc. āmpi, fem. āmpuk, Gk ἄμφω,
Lat. amboˉ), but we also find ∗(H)u- (Skt ubʰáu) and ∗(H)o- (OCS oba). It seems
⁶⁵ Note that Armenian mi ‘one’ also reflects generalization of the feminine, though at a later stage of
its development (cf. Gk fem. μία). The connection of the Hittite numeral with Tocharian A ṣya-was
made by Pinault (2006a: 84), who, however, offers a completely different explanation; Hackstein (2005:
178–9) had already suggested a connection between the Tocharian form and Aiolic Greek fem. ἴα.


===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
68 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
mildly implausible that Germanic—not a notably archaic daughter—preserves the
original stem, but that might be the case.
With ‘three’ we are on firmer ground. In Core IE this numeral preserved an
extraordinarily archaic feminine in ∗/-ser-/, clearly attested in Indo-Iranian and
Celtic:
masc. neut. fem.
nom.-voc. tréyes tríh₂ tisres (accent?)
acc. tríns tríh₂ tisrn ̥s (accent?)
inst. tribʰís tisr ̥bʰís
dat.-abl. trimós tisr ̥mós
gen. trióHom tisróHom
loc. trisú tisr ̥sú
The accent of the fem. direct forms is doubtful. Sanskrit accents the endings, which
is hard to believe for the PIE nom. pl. and almost impossible for the acc. pl.;
unfortunately neither Iranian nor Celtic preserves any unambiguous reflex of the
original accent.
Core IE ‘four’ had a similarly archaic feminine stem:
masc. neut. fem.
nom.-voc. kʷetwóres kʷetwṓr kʷétesres
acc. kʷetwórn ̥s kʷetwṓr kʷétesrn ̥s
inst. kʷetwr ̥bʰís kʷetesr ̥bʰís
dat.-abl. kʷetwr ̥mós kʷetesr ̥mós
gen. kʷeturóHom kʷetesróHom
loc. kʷetwr ̥sú kʷetesr ̥sú
The Tocharian forms of ‘four’ obviously reflect the same inherited word: TB ´stwer,
TA ´stwar < PToch. ∗´sətwe΅rə are sound-change reflexes of ∗kʷetwóres, while the
fem. form TB ´stwāra, TA ´stwār reflects Proto-Tocharian ∗´sətwërá, the masc. form
with the addition of neut. pl. ∗-a and a-umlaut of the preceding vowel. But the Ana-
tolian languages have a completely different word, Hitt. mēyawas and its cognates,
which (strictly speaking) renders the PIE form unreconstructable.
The subsequent numerals up through at least ‘nine’ were uninflected: we are
able to reconstruct ∗pénkʷe ‘five’, ∗swéḱs ‘six’,⁶⁶ ∗septḿ̥ ‘seven’, ∗oḱtṓw ‘eight’, and
(with a bit more uncertainty) ∗(h₁)néwn̥ ‘nine’. Whether ∗déḱm̥ d ‘ten’ was produc-
tively inflected is unclear: in the daughters it isn’t, but the reconstructable decads
are recognizably inflected forms of ‘ten’. Thus ∗wı̄́ ḱm̥ tih₁ ‘twenty’ must be ∗∗dwí-
dḱm̥ t-ih₁ ‘two tens’ (cf. the discussion of Szemerényi 1960: 129–40, and note the
neuter dual ending), while the higher decads ended in an archaic neuter collec-
tive ∗dḱṓmd (Schindler 1967b: 240). ‘Hundred’, reconstructable as ∗ḱm̥ tóm, was
⁶⁶ See now Rothstein-Dowden (2021).


===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 69
a derivative of ‘ten’ (Risch 1962; ∗∗d- was lost by the same regular sound change
that dropped the initial dental stop in oblique cases of ‘earth’, see 2.2.4 (iii), 2.3.4
(ii, iii)). Higher numerals cannot be securely reconstructed.
2.3.6 (ii) PIE ‘pronominal’ inflection
The inflection of the determiner ‘that’ was unusual in a number of ways. I give the
Core IE paradigm:
masc. neut. fem.
singular
nom. só tód sáh₂
acc. tóm tód tā́ m
inst. tóh₁ (tónoh₁?)⁶⁷ ???
dat. tósmey tósyah₂ay
abl. tósmead (?) tósyah₂s
gen. tósyo tósyah₂s
loc. tósmi tósyah₂(i)
dual
nom.-acc. tóh₁ tóy(h₁) ???
masc. neut. fem.
plural
nom. tóy táh₂ táh₂as
acc. tóns táh₂ tā́ s
inst. tṓys táh₂bʰis
dat.-abl. tóymos táh₂mos
gen. tóysoHom táh₂soHom
loc. tóysu táh₂su
The suppletion ∗só- ~ ∗tó- was completely unparalleled elsewhere in the inflec-
tional system. It was in place already in Nuclear IE, since it appears in the
Tocharian deictics; whether it existed already in PIE is unclear, since this deictic
does not appear in Anatolian (Proto-Anatolian ‘that’ was ∗obós). Other pecu-
liarities of this paradigm will reappear in various paradigms cited below: the
endinglessness of the nom. sg. masc.; the neut. direct case ending ∗-d; the infix-
ation of ∗-sm- in most of the masc. and neut. sg. forms (but gen. sg. ∗-osyo) and
of ∗-sy- in the fem. sg., almost certainly reflecting earlier compounding with the
numeral ‘one’ (Gippert 2004 with references; see the preceding section); the nom.
pl. masc. ending ∗-y, originally a collective suffix (Jasanoff 2009: 145–7); the reap-
pearance of ∗-y- in the masc. and neut. oblique pl. forms; the infixation of ∗ -s-,
⁶⁷ Rieken (1999b) argues convincingly that PIE ∗tóh1 underlies the Hittite connective ta. The longer
form, confined to Central IE, is the probable source not only of OE þon, Goth. þana-, but also of the
Old Persian pronominal ending -anā; it might also underlie Vedic ténā ~ téna, if the e of that form can
have been introduced from inst. pl. tébʰis.


===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
70 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
which might be the zero grade of the gen. sg. ending (Jasanoff 2009: 145 fn. 15), in
all the gen. pl. forms. Those are the signature of PIE ‘pronominal’ inflection.
The relative pronoun ∗Hyó- was apparently inflected like ‘that’, except that
the nom. sg. masc. was ‘normal’ ∗Hyós. It appears that a number of quantifiers
and similar lexemes were also inflected in the same way; for instance, a neut.
nom.-acc. sg. ∗ályod ‘other’ is securely reconstructable from Lat. aliud, Gk ἄλλο,
Lydian aλad. The scope of this phenomenon is unclear, though its existence in the
protolanguage is probable. Indo-Iranian and Italic preserve relics of the system
especially well; though the lexemes which are inflected according to this ‘pronom-
inal’ pattern are often not cognate, they typically include the basic words for ‘other,
other (of two), which (of two)?, every, any, one’—that is, quantifiers which happen
to have thematic stems. Various other daughters have eliminated this peculiarity
almost completely (including Greek, which makes ἄλλο especially probative).
A number of parallel pairs of stems seem to have existed in PIE, such that the
o-stem was used in adnominal function while the i/e-stem was used as a full
DP (Warren Cowgill, p.c. ca. 1980; cf. Sihler 1995: 395–400). The distinction
between the Latin interrogative pronoun quis ‘who?’ and interrogative adjective
quī ‘which?’ apparently preserves the PIE situation, though elsewhere leveling has
obscured it. The pairs in question are the following:
adnominal full NP
weak deictic ∗ o-∗i/e-
determiner ‘this’ ∗ḱo-∗ḱi/e-
interrogative ∗kʷo-∗kʷi/e-
The o-stems were inflected like the relative pronoun (i.e. like the determiner
‘that’ except that the nom. sg. masc. ended in ∗-os). But the inflection of the i/e-
stems exhibited a type of ablaut otherwise unexampled in PIE. I give the Core IE
paradigm of the weak deictic:
masc. neut. fem.
singular
nom. éy íd íh₂
acc. ím íd íh₂m̥
inst. íh₁ ???
dat. ésmey ésyah₂ay
abl. ésmead (?) ésyah₂s
gen. ésyo ésyah₂s
loc. ésmi ésyah₂(i)
dual
nom.-acc. ??? ??? ???


===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
2.3 PIE INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY 71
masc. neut. fem.
plural
nom. éyes íh₂ íh₂es (?)
acc. íns íh₂ íh₂n ̥s (?)
inst. éybʰis íh₂bʰis
dat.-abl. éymos íh₂mos
gen. éysoHom íh₂soHom
loc. éysu íh₂su
This lexical item occurred also as a clitic (i.e. unaccented); the difference seems
to have been that the accented form was weakly deictic, while the clitic form
referred to an entity already mentioned in the discourse. The interrogative, too,
occurred as a clitic; its clitic form was indefinite in meaning (∗kʷid ‘something’,
etc.). Apparently the ‘this’-determiner, like ‘that’, was always accented.
2.3.6 (iii) PIE personal pronouns
The first- and second-person pronouns and the Core IE reflexive pronoun exhib-
ited a unique type of inflection. It seems best first to give the forms, then to
comment. For further information the reader is referred especially to Katz (1998),
on which my account is based (though cf. also Sihler 1995: 369–82).
1st person 2nd person 3rd person → Core IE reflexive
singular
nom. éǵh₂ túh₂
acc. emé ~ me twé ~ te swé ~ se
gen. méme ~ moy téwe ~ toy séwe ~ soy
dat. méǵʰye ~ moy tébʰye ~ toy sébʰye ~ soy
dual
nom. wé yú
oblique n ̥h₃mé ~ noh₃ uh₃wé ~ woh₃
plural
nom. wéy yu ̄́(< ∗∗yúy ?)
oblique n ̥smé ~ nos uswé ~ wos
Every detail of these paradigms requires further discussion.
The pronoun in the third column was reflexive only in Core IE. It was prob-
ably third-person reflexive, since probable cognates are third-person pronouns
in Anatolian (Hitt. enclitic -sse ‘to/from him/her/it’, Hoffner and Melchert 2008:
2135–6; -sis ‘his/her/its’, pp. 138–41) and the Toch. B conjunction ṣp ‘and’ plausi-
bly reflects an inst. sg. ∗se-bʰi ‘with it’.⁶⁸ In Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic it became
⁶⁸ Anatolian does show traces of the use of this pronoun as a reflexive, but so far as I can see they
can be innovations; see Yakubovich (2009: 161–96) for comprehensive exposition and analysis. I am
grateful to Craig Melchert for helpful discussion of this point.


===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
72 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
a reflexive for all persons, but in the more westerly languages (as probably in
Core IE) the reflexives of the first and second persons were the ordinary first- and
second-person pronouns. The Core IE reflexive lacked a nominative; that is an
indication that it was bound by the subject of the clause (as in very many daugh-
ters). It was morphologically singular by impoverishment: though it was bound
by dual and plural subjects, the marked number features were deleted in the mor-
phological component of the grammar, so that only singular forms surfaced. (See
especially Noyer 1997 for a comprehensive discussion of morphosyntactic fea-
ture impoverishment.) It was also subject to gender impoverishment. The use of
the reflexive in Latin and of German sich appears to have preserved these pecu-
liarities faithfully. The inflection of the reflexive was clearly parallel to that of
the second person singular, the only difference being the initial ∗s- instead of
2sg. ∗t-.
The inflection of the first- and second-person pronouns seems to have exhibited
the following structural features.
1) They were subject to gender impoverishment.
2) Within each number, the nominative was formed from a separate stem.
Consequently these were the only PIE nominals in which the acc. du.
differed from the nom. du.
3) The singulars were formed from stems completely different from the non-
singulars.
4) There was some sort of relation between the dual and plural stems. It looks
as though the nom. du. was endingless, and the nom. pl. was formed with the
collective suffix ∗-y. But the relation of the oblique stems was more complex,
the duals ending in ∗-h₃- while the plurals ended in ∗ -s-.
5) The clitic accusative form of each pronoun seems to have been the ending-
less oblique stem. The stressed accusative was formed by the addition of a
suffix, probably originally ∗-mé in the first person and ∗-wé in the others, to
the zero grade of the stem (see the comprehensive discussion of Katz 1998:
89–99 with numerous references). In the 1sg. ∗∗mmé seems to have become
∗emé, which survives unchanged in Gk ἐμέ.
6) At least in the singular there were special genitive and dative forms that
showed little resemblance to the caseforms of other nominals.
7) Most strikingly, the case system was greatly impoverished; only four cases
can be reconstructed in the singular, and in the non-singular we cannot even
do that.
As Katz observes, this last characteristic is likely to be an extreme archaism, dating
to a period when the PIE case system was not so fully developed.


===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
2.4 PIE DERIVATIONAL MORPHOLOGY 73
2.4 PIE derivational morphology
The system of PIE word formation was also very elaborate; Brugmann (1906)
spends more than 500 pages listing and exemplifying its formal machinery. The
following paragraphs discuss only some of the most important derivational types.
2.4.1 Compounding
In the more archaic IE daughter languages one encounters combinations of verbs
and adverbs (or ‘preverbs’) that exhibit meanings which are not transparently
compositional. Evidently PIE possessed such ‘compound verbs’, but it is not clear
that any of their idiosyncratic meanings in the daughters should be projected back
into PIE. For instance, reflexes of Core IE ∗pró bʰer- exhibit a wide range of derived
meanings, some of which are shared by more than one daughter language: ‘offer,
present’ in Sanskrit and Greek, ‘reveal, display’ in Greek and Latin, ‘carry off ’ in
Greek and Gothic, and so on; but since all can be derived straightforwardly from
the etymological meaning ∗‘carry forward’, the latter could easily have been the
only meaning of the phrase in Core IE. In all the daughters at least some of these
phrases have become lexemes with idiosyncratic meanings even if they are not yet
single phonological words (like Modern English ‘get up’, ‘get out’, etc., though the
English examples are of much more recent origin). In most attested IE languages
these compounds have also undergone univerbation to single phonological words,
but in the three that are well attested earliest—Hittite, Vedic Sanskrit, and Home-
ric Greek—univerbation is still in progress, and the pattern is rather different in
each. It therefore seems most likely that these were still phrases in PIE and all its
daughters down through Central IE.
By contrast, PIE nominal compounds, including adjectives and nouns that were
derived from compound verbs, were typically single phonological words. Adjec-
tives could be preceded by a wide variety of adverbial prefixes, of which the most
widely attested are ∗ n̥ - ‘un-’, ∗h₁su- ‘good’, ∗dus- ‘bad’, and ∗sēmi- ‘half ’. There seem
to have been several types of compound nouns; they are usually classified by mean-
ing according to a system worked out by the Sanskrit grammarians more than two
millennia ago. Determinative compounds were one of the most important types. In
a determinative the final member of the compound is a noun which refers directly
to what the compound denotes; the preceding member can be an adjective, as in
the modern English example blackbird (a kind of bird which is black), or a noun, as
in werewolf (a wolf who is also a man; cf. OE wer ‘man’). Exocentric compounds,
often referred to as bahuvrīhi compounds (the Sanskrit term), were the other most
important type. In a bahuvrīhi the final noun characterizes, but does not refer to,
what the compound denotes; a typical English example is tenderfoot (literally, a


===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
74 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
person whose feet are tender (because (s)he isn’t used to backpacking—NOT a ten-
der foot, which would be the case if the compound were a determinative). Few
actual PIE examples of these compounds are reconstructable, for the simple rea-
son that nominal compounding remained exuberantly productive in most of the
daughters (including Greek), with new compounds steadily replacing older ones.
But we can at least reconstruct the Central IE compound adjective ∗ń̥ dʰgʷʰitos
‘imperishable’ (and even a phrase ∗ń̥ dʰgʷʰitom ḱléwos ‘imperishable fame’, with
reflexes both in the Rigveda and in Homer), and several scholars have seen that
Homeric Gk ῑ̓ οχέαιρα, an epithet of Artemis, is probably the same word as the
Vedic Skt bahuvrīhi íṣuhastas ‘arrowhand’, i.e. ‘with arrows in his/her hand(s)’;
the PIE word must have been something like (fem.) ∗ísuǵʰesrih₂ (Heubeck 1956,
Peters 1980: 223–8, both with references).
Also important were agentive nominal compounds in which the final element
was a verb root and the prior element the object of the verb; this is the type
exemplified by Vedic Skt vr̥ tra-hán-‘slayer of Vr̥ tra’ and Lat. au-cep-s ‘bird-catcher’.
2.4.2 PIE derivational suffixes
The suffixes by which verbs were derived from other verbs and nominals are listed
in 2.3.3 (i), since the result of such derivation was in every case a distinctive type
of aspect stem. Nominal derivation was much more elaborate, as the following
sections will show.
2.4.2 (i) PIE noun-forming suffixes
The proto-vr̥ ddhi derivational process is described in 2.2.4 (i), since it involved a
(very unusual) morphologized phonological rule. The collective suffix ∗-h₂- is dis-
cussed at the end of 2.3.4 (ii), because it was often integrated into noun paradigms
as a neuter nom.-acc. pl. ending. In some cases collectives might have been rein-
terpreted as feminine singulars; in many of the daughters, including Greek, a large
proportion of feminine ∗-ah₂-stems belong to derivational classes that could have
originated as collectives.
Large and productive classes of thematic nouns with o-grade roots (which I
symbolize as R(o)) were formed from verb stems. The type R(ó)-o- (masc.) and
its collective R(o)-áh₂- (fem.) denoted the action of the verb; the type R(o)-ó-
(masc.), which was probably restricted to the final element of compounds, denoted
the agent. Typical examples include ∗ǵónh₁-o-s, collective ∗ǵonh₁-áh₂ ‘begetting,
birth, offspring’ (Gk γονος,´ γονή ‘offspring’; Skt jánas ‘creature, person’, janā́
‘birth’), ∗-ǵonh₁-ó-s ‘begetter’ (Gk compound τεκνογ´ονος ‘begetting children’
with typically shifted accent), all derived from ∗ǵenh₁- ‘to beget, to bear (a child)’;
∗dʰrógʰos ‘(act of ) running’ (Gk τρ´οχος ‘circular course’), ∗dʰrogʰós ‘runner,


===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
2.4 PIE DERIVATIONAL MORPHOLOGY 75
wheel’ (apparently decompound; cf. Gk τροχ´ος, OIr. droch, both ‘wheel’), from
∗dʰregʰ- ‘to run’; ∗sóngʷʰos ‘chant’ (PGmc ∗ sangʷaz ‘song’), collective ∗ songʷʰáh₂
(Gk ὀμφή ‘divine voice’) from ∗ sengʷʰ- ‘to chant’. Similar collectives were also
made with zero-grade roots, e.g. ∗bʰugáh₂ ‘flight, escape’ (Gk φυγή, Lat. fuga)
from ∗bʰewg- ‘to run away, to flee’. Other types of nouns derived with the thematic
vowel also existed, though they may not have been productive; obvious examples
are the neuters ∗yugóm ‘yoke’ (Hitt. iukan, Skt yugám, etc.) from ∗yewg- ‘to join’
and ∗wérǵom ‘work’ (Gk ἔργον, PGmc ∗werką) from ∗werǵ- ‘to work’. As can be
seen from the cognates cited, nouns denoting actions tend also to denote the results
of those actions; there is no clear dividing line between them.
Neuter s-stems with accented e-grade roots were also action/result nouns. Well-
attested examples include ∗ǵénh₁os ~ ∗ǵénh₁es- ‘family, lineage’ (Skt jánas, Gk
γένος, Lat. genus) from ∗ǵénh₁- ‘to beget’; ∗ḱléwos ~ ∗ḱléwes- ‘fame’ (Skt ´srávas,
Gk κλέος) from ∗ḱlew- ‘to hear’; ∗wékʷos ~ ∗wékʷes- ‘word’ (Skt vácas, Gk ἔπος)
from ∗wekʷ- ‘to say’; etc.
Another class of action/result nouns were proterokinetic neuters in ∗ -men-.
Typical examples include ∗néwmn̥ ~ ∗numén- ‘nod’ (Gk νε˜υμα, Lat. numenˉ) from
∗new- ‘to nod’ and ∗séh₁mn̥ ~ ∗sh₁mén- ‘seed’ (Lat. sēmen, OCS sěmę) from ∗seh₁-
‘to sow’. This class seems to have made amphikinetic collectives; thus the collective
of the latter was ∗séh₁mˉo ~ ∗sh₁mn- (OHG sāmo).
Still another group of these nouns were masculine, with the thematic suffix
∗-mo-. Two ablaut classes, R(ó)-mo- and R(0)-mó-, were well represented. To
the former belonged, e.g., ∗tórmos ‘borehole’ (Gk τ´ορμος ‘socket’, PGmc ∗þarmaz
‘intestine’) from ∗terh₁- ‘to bore’; an example of the latter is ∗dʰuh₂mós ‘smoke’
(Skt dʰ umásˉ, Lat. fumusˉ) from ∗dʰuh₂- ‘to smoke’.
Two large and productive groups of action nouns, feminines in ∗-ti- and mas-
culines in ∗-tu-, had proterokinetic inflection; caseforms of both developed into
infinitives in various daughter languages. Typical examples include ∗ gʷém-ti-s ~
∗ gʷm̥ -téy- ‘step’ (Skt gátis, Gk βάσις; cf. Lat. con-venti-oˉ, Goth. ga-qumþ-s ‘assem-
bly’, lit. ‘coming together’); ∗mér-ti-s ~ ∗ mr̥ -téy- ‘death’ (Lat. mors, morti-, Lith.
mirtìs); ∗pér-tu-s ~ ∗ pr̥ -téw- ‘crossing’ (Av. pərətuš; Lat. portus ‘port’, PGmc ∗ferþuz
‘fjord’ and ∗furduz ‘ford’). Additional examples have been cited in 2.3.4 (ii).
Neuter nouns denoting instruments were formed with four similar suffixes,
∗-tro-, ∗-tlo-, ∗-dʰro-, and ∗-dʰlo-; the root seems usually to have been accented and
e-grade. Typical examples include ∗h₂árh₃trom ‘plow’ (Gk ἄροτρον, OIr. arathar);
∗póh₃tlom ‘drinking-cup’ (Lat. poculumˉ); ∗kréydʰrom ‘sieve’ (Lat. crībrum);
∗syúHdʰlom ‘awl’ (OCS šilo; the collective appears in Lat. subulaˉ).
Masculine agent nouns were made with a suffix ∗-ter-; both amphikinetic and
hysterokinetic inflection seem to be reconstructable, though the accent and ablaut
relations have become confused in the daughters. An example of the former is
∗ǵénh₁tˉor ‘parent’ (Gk γενέτωρ, Lat. genitor); the latter underlies such examples
as Gk δοτήρ ‘giver’.


===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
76 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
Abstract nouns were derived from adjectives with a variety of suffixes. There
was a large group in ∗-tah₂, e.g. ∗h₂yuHn̥ táh₂ ‘youth’ (Lat. iuventa, Goth. junda).
At least some of these nouns made to o-stem adjectives ended in ∗-étah₂; cf. e.g.
Skt nagnátā ‘nakedness’ (to nagnás ‘naked’) and Goth. hauhiþa ‘height’ (to hauhs
‘high’). Also well attested is a suffix ∗-tāt- (∗-tah₂t-?), e.g. in ∗néwotāt-s ‘newness’
(Lat. novitās; Gk νε´οτης ‘youth’).
2.4.2 (ii) PIE adjective-forming suffixes
An extensive derivational system called the Caland system (after the Sanskri-
tist who first noticed some of the connections) can be reconstructed for PIE. At
the center of the Caland system were proterokinetic adjectives in ∗-u-, isofunc-
tional thematic adjectives in ∗-ró- with zero-grade roots, and adjective stems in
∗-i- (likewise with zero-grade roots) that appear in compounds. (The system also
included, for example, neuter s-stem action nouns (see 2.4.2 (i)) and derived
statives/fientives (see 2.3.3 (i)).) Occasionally a complete set of such adjectives
can be reconstructed for PIE. For instance, ∗h₂r̥ ǵ-ró-s ‘white’ survives in Vedic
Skt r̥ jrás ‘shining, swift’ and Homeric Gk ἀργ´ος ‘bright’; the synonymous u-stem
∗h₂árǵ-u- ~ ∗h₂r̥ ǵ-éw- is attested in Toch. B ārkwi; and the compounding stem
∗h₂r̥ ǵi- appears in Homeric Gk pl. ἀργίποδες ‘swift-footed’ (lit. ∗‘sparklingfoots’)
and Skt r̥ jipyás ‘eagle’ (lit. ∗‘white-backed’; the second element is the zero grade
of ∗op- ‘back’, cf. Aischylos Agamemnon 115).⁶⁹ (The i-stem may not originally
have been confined to compounds, to judge from Hitt. harkis ‘white’.) For ‘deep’
we are likewise able to reconstruct both PIE ∗dʰubrós (cf. Toch. B tapre ‘high’)
and ∗dʰéwbus ~ ∗dʰubéw- (cf. Lith. dubùs ‘hollow’; apparently transferred into
the thematic class in PGmc ∗deupaz ‘deep’). More often one member of a Caland
word-family survives especially well; for instance, there are widespread reflexes
of ∗h₁rudʰrós ‘red’ (Gk ἐρυθρ´ος, Lat. ruber, late Church Slavonic rŭdrŭ, Toch. B
ratre) and of ∗ gʷráh₂u-s ~ ∗ gʷr̥ h₂áw- ‘heavy’ (Skt gurús, Gk βαρύς, Lat. gravis,
Goth. kaúrus).
The Caland system was a system of ‘primary’ derivation, operating on roots.
The most important PIE ‘secondary’ adjective suffix, forming adjectives from
nouns, was thematic ∗-yó-. The thematic vowel of an underlying noun was zeroed
before this suffix. For instance, from ∗kóros ‘cutting, section, division’ (OPers.
kāra ‘people, army’; Lith. kãras ‘war’) was formed ∗kóryos ‘detached’, substan-
tivized in the northern languages to mean ‘detachment, war party’ (Lith. kãrias,
PGmc ∗harjaz ‘army’; OIr. cuire ‘company, host’); from ∗h₂áǵros ‘meadow, field’
(Skt ájras, Gk ἀγρ´ος, Lat. ager, PGmc ∗akraz) was formed ∗h₂áǵrios ‘characteris-
tic of meadows/fields’ (Skt ajryás; Gk ἄγριος ‘wild’); and so on. Otherwise the
suffix was simply added to the noun stem, e.g. ∗diwyós ‘heavenly’ (Skt divyás,
⁶⁹ That PIE ∗ op- ~ ∗ep- might have meant ‘(animal’s) back’ was suggested to me by Warren Cowgill
ca. 1980.


===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
2.4 PIE DERIVATIONAL MORPHOLOGY 77
Homeric Gk δῖος) from ∗dyew- ‘sky’, ∗ph₂triós ‘fatherly’ (Skt pítryas, Gk πάτριος,
Lat. patrius) from ∗ph₂ter- ‘father’, etc.
Verbal adjectives with zero-grade roots were derived by means of the thematic
suffixes ∗-tó-, ∗-nó-, and ∗-wó-. The last of these seems to have been rare, though
an example which survived very widely was ∗ gʷih₃wós ‘alive’ (Skt jīvás, Lat. vīvos,
PGmc ∗kʷikʷaz, etc.). By contrast, ∗-tó- became the suffix of perfect participles
in Latin, and both ∗-tó- and ∗-nó- acquired a similar function in Indo-Iranian,
Balto-Slavic, and Germanic.
There seems to have been a system of contrastive adjective suffixes in PIE. Adjec-
tives in ∗-ero- apparently meant ‘X (as opposed to its antonym)’; those in ∗ -mo-
or ∗ -m̥ o- meant ‘X (as opposed to everything else)’. Typical examples are ∗éperos
‘behind’ (Skt áparas; neut. in OIr. prep. íar ‘after’) and ∗ pr̥ Hmós ‘furthest forward’
(Lith. pìrmas; remodeled in PGmc ∗frumo˭ ‘first’). There were also forms of these
suffixes extended with ∗-t-, namely ∗-tero-, e.g. in ∗énteros ‘inside’ (Skt ántaras;
Lat. comparative interior ‘further in’), and ∗-tm̥ o-, e.g. in ∗éntm̥ os ‘inmost’ (Skt
ántamas, Lat. intimus).
There was an important class of athematic adjectives in ∗-went- meaning ‘having
X’ (where X is the noun to which the suffix was added); cf. e.g. Skt putrá-vant-‘hav-
ing sons’ (putrá-s ‘son’), Gk χαρί-εντ- ‘graceful, lovely’ (χάρι-ς ‘grace, loveliness’).
This class is well represented in Anatolian, Indo-Iranian, Greek, and Tocharian
(a distribution which guarantees its antiquity, even though specific examples are
hard to reconstruct).
Finally, it is clear that two formally similar but functionally distinct suffixes have
been important in the development of the daughter languages. One, apparently
underlyingly ∗/-en-/, was used to ‘individualize’ adjectives; it appears in Latin cog-
nomina (originally nicknames) such as Catoˉ ‘the Shrewd’ (catus ‘shrewd’). The
other, underlyingly ∗/-Hen-/, had a function similar to ∗-went- (see the preceding
paragraph); it is well represented in Indo-Iranian (Hoffmann 1955) and appears
in Latin cognomina such as Nāsoˉ ‘Bignose’ (∗‘having a nose’; cf. nāsus ‘nose’).
2.4.2 (iii) Derivational suffixes that eventually became inflectional
Several PIE derivational suffixes were integrated into the inflectional system in
numerous daughter languages. By far the most important were the collective suffix
∗-h₂- (see 2.3.4 (i) ad fin.) and the feminine suffixes ∗-h₂-, which formed feminines
in ∗-ah₂- from o-stems, and ∗´-ih₂- ~ ∗-yáh₂-, which formed feminines from ath-
ematic stems and induced proterokinetic inflection. Numerous examples of fem.
∗-ah₂- can be found among the adjectives of all the more archaic non-Anatolian
languages; ∗-ih₂- ~ ∗-yáh₂- survives robustly in Greek, Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic,
and Germanic, always with some innovations. For examples, see 2.3.5.
In Core IE, at the latest, there was an elative suffix ∗ -yos- ~ ∗-is- deriving adjec-
tives that meant something like ‘exceptionally X’, where X was the meaning of
the basic adjective. This suffix apparently induced amphikinetic inflection; for


===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
78 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
example, from ∗h₁wér-u-s ~ ∗h₁ur-éw- ‘broad’ (Skt urús, Gk εὐρύς, both with zero
grade of the root generalized) was constructed ∗h₁wér-yos- ~ ∗h₁ur-is- ‘unusu-
ally broad’ (Skt várīyas-‘broader’). Note that the suffix was added directly to the
root; evidently it was part of the Caland system. In all the daughters in which this
suffix survives it has become a comparative suffix. Superlatives were subsequently
formed from it, in ∗-is-m̥ o- in Italic and Celtic, but in ∗-is-to- in the other daughters
(cf. Skt váriṣṭʰas ‘broadest’).
2.5 PIE syntax
By now it is clear that the syntax of a natural human language is an autonomous
system of rules not derived from the language’s inflectional morphology.⁷⁰ It fol-
lows that the Classical tradition, which treats syntax as the interface between
inflection and ‘meaning’, is fundamentally misconceived. In this section I will use
a generalized transformational framework which I hope will be familiar from basic
introductions to syntax.⁷¹
Unfortunately the reconstruction of autonomous syntax is very difficult. The
best discussion of the reasons for that disappointing state of affairs is Walkden
(2014: 47–64), to which the interested reader is referred. Here I will outline the
scholarly consensus about the syntax of PIE; it is fragmentary, but a good deal
better than nothing. A similar outline, with examples, can be found in Fortson
(2010: 152–68); Clackson (2007: 157–86) offers a discussion of selected topics in
greater depth, also with examples.
⁷⁰ This is easy to demonstrate. For instance, modern standard German, like some other languages,
has ‘dummy subjects’ whose semantic content is zero, e.g.
Es regnet heute. ‘It’s raining today.’ (cf. French: Il pleut aujourd’hui.)
Es gibt keine Ausnahmen. ‘There are no exceptions.’ (cf. French: Il n’y a pas d’exceptions.)
We know that they are subjects because when some other constituent is fronted in a main clause the
dummy subject appears after the verb:
Heute regnet es.
Keine Ausnahmen gibt es.
But German also has dummy topics, e.g.:
Es wird hier getanzt. ‘There’s dancing here.’ (Literally: ‘It is danced here.’)
Dummy topics do not appear after the verb:
Hier wird getanzt.
Either phenomenon is a good argument for autonomous syntax; to differentiate between the two a
theory of autonomous syntax is absolutely necessary.
⁷¹ For an introduction to the latest version of generative syntax, ‘Minimalism’, see e.g. Radford
(2004). For current purposes any version since about 1980 will be adequate; a good introduction to
the earliest version of generative syntax that can handle all relevant phenomena is Haegeman (1991).


===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
2.5 PIE SYNTAX 79
Kiparsky (1995) suggested that, since neither Hittite nor Vedic Sanskrit seems
to possess an obvious complementizer,⁷² no CP-projection can be reconstructed
for PIE. But since it has become clear that phrase structures cannot be projected
from lexemes, even from ‘functional heads’ (as was supposed in the late 1980s),
the reconstruction of a CP does not depend on the reconstruction of a particular
complementizer (cf. Newton 2005: 97).⁷³ In fact it is difficult to see what projec-
tion in a subordinate clause Old Hittite takku ‘if ’ or mān ‘when’ can occupy if
it is not Comp (see Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 414–29 for the facts), and the
same can be said of Rigvedic yát ‘if, when’. The same position (which Kiparsky
calls ‘Focus’) is apparently the landing site for WH-elements in most early IE lan-
guages: Mark Hale demonstrated that fully 90% of Vedic interrogative and relative
pronouns occur clause-initially, and that virtually all of the remaining examples
occur immediately following a single constituent that has been topicalized (Hale
1987: 8–24). For instance, in the Vedic clause:
brahmā́ kó vaḥ saparyati? ‘Which priest honors you (pl.)?’ (RV VIII.7.20c, cited by
Hale 1987: 10).
the interrogative kó ‘which?’ has been moved into clause-initial CP, and the noun
brahmā́ ‘priest’ is still further to the left because it is topicalized. It seems clear
that we must reconstruct a CP for PIE, optionally dominated by at least a ‘Topic
Phrase’ into which a topic can be moved, so that the topic normally precedes every-
thing else. Whether we can be more specific is not so clear. For one thing, the
system might have been more complex, with multiple focus positions (see espe-
cially the discussion of Newton 2005: 97–100); for another, it now appears that
in Hittite interrogatives, at least, can occupy more than one focus position in the
clause (see Goedegebuure 2009), and it is possible that the same was true of PIE.
It also appears that both adjoined and embedded relative clauses were present in
Old Hittite (see Probert 2006b); the implications of that fact for the reconstruction
of PIE syntax are not clear.
It is of course not surprising that topics have been moved to the leftmost position
in the clause in ancient IE languages (and almost certainly were in PIE as well), but
the position of the Comp node to the left is interesting because it contrasts with
the ‘headedness’ of the rest of the clause. In Hittite, both Tocharian languages,
and Vedic prose the unmarked word order of the verb phrase (i.e. the lexical verb
and its objects) and of the ‘inflection’-phrase is head-final; the basic schema is
Comp–S–O–V–T, where T (‘Tense’) marks the position of the finite verb and V
⁷² Hitt. kuit is actually used as a complementizer, though there seem to be no Old Hittite examples
(Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 414, 426).
⁷³ In fact this is true under any assumptions about phrase structure, since the recorded history of
languages shows that complementizers replace one another fairly frequently with no impact on the
structures that host them.


===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
80 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
the position of non-finite members of the verb phrase (if any). Typical examples
include the following:⁷⁴
Hittite:
n=us LUGAL-us … LÚ.MEŠAPIN.LÁ iyanun.
ptcl=them-ACC king-NOM … farmers make-PAST-1SG
‘I, the king, made them farmers.’ (cited in Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 247)
Tocharian B:
kuce tu pwārntse yarke yamaṣṣeñcañ ṣeyeṃ, tu
what that fire-GEN reverence do-PRES-PTC-NOMPL be-IPF-3PL that
yparwe tuwak kottarcce pelaikne ākṣtsi
at-first that-EMPH family-ADJ-OBL law teach-INF
añmassu kakā-me weñā-me´s:
desirous call-PRET-3SG-them say-PRET-3SG-them-ALL
‘In as much as they had been doing reverence to fire, he therefore, desiring to
teach them this, the family law, called them and said to them:’⁷⁵ (Berlin 108b9)
Vedic prose:
téna  ͜asmíṃl loké dʰr̥ táḥ purástāt prā́ yaṇaṃ
that-INST this-LOC world-LOC held-NOM east-from approach-ACC
kuryāt.
make-AOR-OPT-3SG
‘For that reason, firmly established in this world, let him make the approach
from the east.’ (Maitrāyaṇī-Saṃhitā 3.6.1)
The same is true of the ostentatiously straightforward Latin of Julius Caesar’s
Bellum Gallicum; by a statistical analysis of double-object clauses Ann Taylor
has demonstrated that Homeric Greek was underlyingly verb-final (Taylor 1990:
91–5), and Fortson notes that traditional sayings in Homer, like those of Vedic,
are normally verb-final (Fortson 2010: 156–7). It seems clear that the underlying
word order of clauses that we must reconstruct for PIE is the one given above.
Surface word order was clearly much more variable, however.⁷⁶ We would
expect it to have been possible to extrapose heavy constituents to the right, beyond
the tensed verb, so as to avoid the parsing problems posed by center embedding;
‘dislocation’ to the left would also be unsurprising. (See Hoffner and Melchert
2008: 406–9 for Hittite examples of these processes and Fortson 2010: 159–61 for
general discussion.) But in addition conservative daughters of PIE exhibit one or
⁷⁴ The word-for-word translations employ the Leipzig Glossing Rules (https://www.eva.mpg.de/
lingua/pdf/Glossing-Rules.pdf).
⁷⁵ The object pronouns attached to the verbs are clitics which do not ‘count’ as separate phonological
words.
⁷⁶ I am grateful to Joseph Eska for helpful discussion of this paragraph and for several references.


===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
2.5 PIE SYNTAX 81
more ‘scrambling’ rules, by which constituents of the sentence can be reordered
for pragmatic reasons. The result can be an unusual permutation of words even in
straightforward prose, e.g. in Cicero’s letters:
Ad eˉorum voluntātem mihī conciliandam
to their will-ACC me-DAT win-over-PASS-FUT-PTC-FEM-ACC
maximoˉmihī tē usuīˉ fore video.ˉ
great-SUP-MASC-DAT me-DAT you-ACC utility-DAT be-FUT-INF see-1SG
‘I see that you will be of the greatest utility to me for winning their good will for
me.’ (Cicero, to Atticus 1.2)
in which maximoˉ ‘greatest’, which modifies usuīˉ ‘utility’, has been fronted to a posi-
tion immediately after the participial embedded clause. It is very likely that such
rules existed in PIE as well. Ancient Greek exhibits even more extreme movement,
routinely separating the constituents of noun phrases and apparently moving
sequences that are not constituents even in straightforward prose. Agbayani and
Golston (2010) demonstrate that such ‘hyperbaton’ cannot be syntactic in nature
and make a strong argument that it is phonological. Whether similar movement
processes operated in PIE is not clear.
The internal word order of noun phrases in PIE was probably also head-final.
Tocharian noun phrases are almost as relentlessly head-final as clauses; Clackson
(2007: 166) points out that the fossilization of PIE ∗déms pótis ‘head of household’,
with the genitive preceding the head noun, as δεσπ´οτης in Greek (and of a similar
phrase in Lith. viẽšpats) likewise suggests underlyingly head-final noun phrases
in the protolanguage. But the daughters diverge to a significant degree, and more
work on the order of elements in noun phrases will certainly be needed.
Case is assigned to noun phrases in at least three ways in conservative daughters,
and the PIE system must have been much the same. ‘Structural’ case assignment
depended on the syntactic environment of the noun phrase. Thus subjects of
finite verbs were assigned nominative case; direct objects of verbs were assigned
accusative case by their governing verbs in the default instance (see further below);
noun phrase complements of noun phrases were assigned genitive case by govern-
ment by N; and the indirect object of verbs like ‘give’ was probably assigned dative
case structurally (whatever the structure of those verb phrases may have been).
It is likely that some verbs assigned case to their objects by lexical rather than
structural government; for instance, since verbs meaning ‘remember’ take genitive
objects in many daughter languages, there is a reasonable probability that at least
one such verb did so in PIE as well. Adjectives may also have assigned case lexically
to the complements of their adjective phrases. Whether PIE possessed adpositions
is debated (see below), but if it did, they must have assigned case to their objects.
Finally, it seems clear that in many instances case was assigned semantically (i.e.
expressed a particular meaning directly). Number and case clearly ‘percolated’


===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
82 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
from a DP node to all constituents of the noun phrase not dominated by interme-
diate DP nodes; thus adjectives and determiners in a noun phrase, for example,
were marked with the same number and case as the head noun. Adjectives, deter-
miners, and most quantifiers modifying a noun exhibited gender concord with the
noun. In addition, concord of number and gender obtained under coreference.
One peculiar detail of case assignment seems to be an instance of ‘conjunction
reduction’. In Vedic a pair of conjoined vocatives is normally replaced by a vocative
and a nominative; the paradigm example is Vā́ yav Índra´s ca ‘O Vayu and Indra’.
Since there is also one Greek example in Homer, Ζε˜υ πάτερ … Ἠέλι´ος τε ‘O Zeus
and Helios’ (Il. 3.277), it seems clear that this construction was inherited at least
from Central IE (Fortson 2010: 156); it apparently shows that the nominative was
the default case.
Typical of all the more archaic languages are ‘absolute’ constructions, in which a
noun phrase and a participle in an oblique case are the equivalent of a subordinate
clause; a stereotyped Latin example is the ablative absolute hīs rēbus gestīs, literally
‘with these things done’, meaning ‘when these things had been done’. The attested
languages that have undergone relatively little merger of cases use different cases
in this way: the ablative in Latin, the locative in Sanskrit, the dative in Old Church
Slavonic. It seems likely that PIE used several cases, with different meanings or
implications, in absolute constructions.
Whether PIE possessed adpositions has sometimes been questioned. If some
of the oblique case endings ultimately reflect adverbs (see 2.3.4 (i)), it is almost
certain that the adverbs had first become postpositions, since that is the usual inter-
mediate stage between adverb and inflectional ending (as Patrick Stiles reminds
me). The extensive set of adverbs which were used with the oblique cases (Brug-
mann 1911: 758–930) could have been modifiers of DPs which were assigned case
directly, but it seems at least as likely that they were adpositions. Among Anato-
lianists there appears to be a consensus that some Hittite local adverbs preceded
by nouns in some cases are actual postpositions, but there are also areas of dis-
agreement (see Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 297–301, with references p. 294, and
Melchert 2009). The situation in Vedic Sanskrit appears to be similar. It seems
clear that in all daughters at least some inherited adverbs eventually developed into
genuine adpositions. In the Tocharian languages a number of postpositions have
become case-marking clitics (the ‘secondary’ case system), typically appended to
entire phrases (‘Gruppenflexion’); there are also independent postpositions and a
few prepositions. If any adverbs had become adpositions already in PIE, or even in
Core IE, they are much more likely to have been postpositions than prepositions;
that is in line with the overall head-final syntax of the language and the direct tes-
timony of Hittite and Tocharian. The fact that some case endings appear originally
to have been postpositions (see 2.3.4 (i)) points in the same direction.
Many of the same adverbs that eventually became adpositions also appear
as particles in verb-plus-particle constructions in the more conservative IE


===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
2.5 PIE SYNTAX 83
languages. Eventually the particles became lexical prefixes in all the daughters
(a process called ‘univerbation’), but that was clearly an independent develop-
ment, since it is still incomplete in Hittite, Vedic, and Homeric Greek. Even the
creation of verb-plus-particle lexemes in the first place might have been a parallel
development, since it was repeated much later—and independently—in German
and English (German verbs with ‘separable prefixes’ and English constructions of
the type get up).
Though there were no comparative or superlative forms of adjectives in PIE nor
(probably) in Core IE, there must have been a syntactic construction expressing
comparison. One might expect the standard of comparison to have been in the
ablative, as in Vedic and Latin, but Hittite uses the dative-locative instead (Hoffner
and Melchert 2008: 273–6).
Whether PIE had reflexive pronouns is unclear—it seems possible that
mediopassive forms of transitive verbs were the only way to express reflexive
objects—but Core IE clearly did. To judge from the situation in the attested
daughters, binding of reflexive pronouns at that stage occurred only within the
clause.
There was concord of person and number (but not gender) between a finite
verb and its subject. It seems clear that PIE was a ‘null subject’ language, like all its
earliest attested daughters (and many later descendants, such as modern Spanish);
probably unstressed direct and indirect objects could also be null on the surface,
as in Hittite (Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 277) and Gothic (Walkden 2014: 164).
Mediopassive forms of transitive verbs were also used in passive clauses, as in
Hittite, Tocharian, Vedic, Greek, Latin, etc. It is likely that this was an innovation
in PIE, the inherited middle, which was originally reflexive, being used also to
express the passive (a process that repeated itself, with other morphological means,
much later in Romance and Slavic). The agent of a passive clause was probably in
the instrumental case, as argued in Jamison (1979) and Melchert (2016), since that
is usual in Vedic Sanskrit and apparently also in Old Hittite (Hoffner and Melchert
2008: 269).
In all the most archaic daughters the present indicative of ‘be’ can be omit-
ted, resulting in clauses with no overt verb. These are sometimes called ‘nominal’
clauses. For examples from several languages, see Fortson (2010: 158).
A striking feature of PIE syntax was clitic floating, traditionally called ‘Wack-
ernagel’s Law’, by which clitics, including clitic pronouns, moved to a position
immediately to the right of the first constituent in the clause. Recent work on
archaic IE languages has shown that more than one movement process is involved,
and in fact more than one landing site can be identified structurally; see especially
Hale (1987) and Taylor (1990) for extended discussion, and Fortson (2010: 161–3)
for a brief summary with examples. Hittite, Vedic, and Ancient Greek preserve
Wackernagel’s Law particularly well, though it is also observable to some extent in
other early-attested daughters.


===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
84 PROTO-INDO-EUROPE AN
2.6 The PIE lexicon
In addition to the derivational types discussed in earlier sections of this chapter,
at least several hundred underived PIE lexemes can be reconstructed. Unfortu-
nately there is no good, up-to-date comparative dictionary of PIE. Pokorny (1959)
is badly out of date; moreover, it errs extravagantly on the side of inclusion, list-
ing every word known to the author that might conceivably reflect a PIE lexeme if
one’s etymological standards are not too strict. Rix et al. (2001) is a great improve-
ment, but it covers only non-derived verbs; moreover, the authors persist in listing
items that are attested in only one daughter, so that a non-specialist must read
through the volume to get an accurate idea of what is securely reconstructable for
PIE. Wodtko et al. (2008) is comprehensive for what it covers, but it includes only
a selection of PIE nouns (admittedly a large and interesting selection). Under the
circumstances it is still advisable to consult the best etymological dictionaries of
the more archaic daughters as well.
Reconstruction of the PIE lexicon can tell us a good deal about the culture of
the protolanguage’s speakers; Fortson (2010: 16–47) provides a good introduc-
tion. The most difficult problem is assessing the gaps that we inevitably find. For
instance, it comes as no surprise that there was no PIE word for ‘iron’, since there
are numerous indications that PIE was spoken before the Iron Age. But what about
the fact that there is also no reconstructable word for ‘finger’? Obviously speakers
of the language had fingers, and they must have had a word for them; the fact
that we cannot reconstruct it can only be the result of its loss in all the major
subgroups (or all but one). The hard fact is that linguistic evidence relentlessly
degrades and disappears over time, and that imposes an inexorable limit on what
can be reconstructed.
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0002


===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
3
The phonological development
of Proto-Greek
3.1 Introduction
This chapter describes in detail the regular sound changes that occurred in
the development of Greek roughly down to the time when the attested Greek
dialects began to diverge from one another. I say ‘roughly’ because that time is
somewhat indeterminate in two different ways. In terms of real time, we know
that the attested Greek dialects had begun to diverge somewhat earlier than the
late Mycenaean period when the Linear B documents were written (the 14th and
13th centuries BC), because the dialect of those documents exhibits innovations
not shared by some other Greek dialects; but we do not know exactly how much
earlier that divergence had begun. In terms of the chronology of changes, it is not
always easy to distinguish between changes which occurred before the dialects
had begun to diverge significantly, and are therefore shared by all the dialects,
and changes which occurred later in one dialect and spread to all the rest, or even
occurred independently in already diversified dialects. I will comment on difficult
cases as we encounter them.
I group the sound changes in sets, arranged partly thematically and partly
chronologically, and I will discuss the chronological relationships of each sound
change to others, to the extent that they can be recovered.
3.2 The elimination of laryngeals
The sound changes which eliminated the ‘laryngeal’ consonants appear to have
occurred early in the prehistory of Greek; no sound change can be shown to have
occurred earlier. In some positions the laryngeals were lost; in others they are
reflected by vowels, or by vowel length. But Greek, unlike most daughters of PIE,
preserved the original distinction between the three laryngeals in most positions,
because they gave rise to different Greek vowels. Exactly what happened depended
on what sounds were adjacent to the laryngeals.


===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 89
3.2.1 The loss of laryngeals next to non-high vowels
When followed immediately by non-high vowels in the same syllable, laryngeals
were lost; the allophones of PIE ∗/e/ which the laryngeals had induced (∗[a] next
to ∗h₂, ∗[o] next to ∗h₃) thereby became fully contrastive. Since the same change
occurred in most daughters, it is often difficult to determine whether or not a
particular word had a laryngeal in it in PIE (especially in the case of ∗h₁). The
following examples, some with laryngeals and some without, seem reasonably
certain:
PIE ∗h₁esti ‘(s)he is’ (Lat. est; for the laryngeal cf. Skt ā́ sat-‘not existing’ < ∗ nˊ- ̥
h₁s-n̥ t-) > ἐστι;
PIE ∗h₁ed- ‘eat’ (Lat. edere; for the laryngeal cf. ‘tooth’ in 3.2.4) > Hom. inf.
ἔδμεναι;
PIE ∗én ‘in’, deriv. ∗éndom ‘inside’ (Old Lat. en > Lat. in, Hitt. andan; no
laryngeal in Vedic Skt jm-án ‘on the earth’¹) > ἐν, ἔνδον
PIE ∗ op- ~ ∗ ep- ‘back’ (Hitt. āppa ‘back, again’, āppan ‘behind, after’; cf. Skt
r̥ jipyás ‘eagle’ < ∗h₂r̥ ǵi-p-yó-s ‘white-back’ with no evidence of laryngeal) >
ἐπί, Myc. o-pi ‘on’ (orig. locative ∗‘on the back of ’);
PIE ∗h₂ánti → ∗h₂antı´ ‘on the surface (lit. ‘forehead’), in front of ’ (Hitt. hānz
‘in front’ and remodeled hantī ‘apart’; Lat. ante ‘in front of ’) > ἀντί ‘instead
of ’;
PIE ∗h₂áǵeti ‘(s)he is leading/driving’, deriv. ∗h₂óǵmos ‘path of driving’ (Skt
ájati, Lat. agit, both ‘(s)he drives’) > ἄγει ‘(s)he is leading’, ὄγμος ‘furrow’;
PIE ∗h₂ank- ‘to bend’, derivs. (s-stem) ∗h₂ánkos and (o-stem) ∗h₂ónkos
‘(a) bend’ (Skt áñcati ‘it curves’, s-stem áṅkas ‘(a) curve’; Lat. o-stem uncus
‘hook’) > ἀγκύλος ‘bent, crooked’, ἄγκος ‘glen’, ὄγκος ‘barb’;
PIE ∗átta ‘dad’ (Lat. atta, respectful form of address for old men; cf. Hitt. attas
‘father’) > Hom. ἄττα ‘Sir, Father’;
PIE ∗ályos ‘other’ (Lydian aλa-, Lat. alius) > ἄλλος;
PIE ∗h₂ówis ~ ∗h₂áwi- ‘sheep’ (Kimball 1987: 189; Lycian acc. sg. xawã, Toch.
B āu ‘ewe’ (Kim 2000b), Skt ávis, Lat. ovis) > Hom. ὄϊς;
PIE ∗h₂óst ~ ∗h₂ást- ‘bone’, extended ∗h₂ostey- (Hitt. hastai, Lat. os, cf. Welsh
asgwrn) > ὀστέον > Att. ὀστõν;
PIE ∗h₃ósdos ‘branch’ (Goth. asts, cf. Hitt. hasduēr ‘twigs, brush’) > ὄζος;
PIE ∗h₃órō, ∗h₃óron- ~∗ h₃r̥ n- ‘eagle’ (Hitt. hāras, hāran-) in deriv. ὄρνῑς ‘bird’;
PIE ∗órsos ‘arse’ (Hitt. ārras, OE ears) > Att. ὄρρος;
PIE ∗ǵénh₁os, gen. ∗ǵénh₁esos ‘lineage’ (Skt jánas, jánasas, Lat. genus, generis;
for the laryngeal cf. ‘parent’ below and in 3.2.4) > γένος, γένεος > Att. γένος,
γένōς;
¹ I am grateful to Michael Weiss for alerting me to this form.


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
90 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-iéti ‘(s)he is sharp-eared’ (Goth. hauseiþ, OE hīerþ, both ‘(s)he
hears’) > ἀκούει ‘(s)he hears’;
PIE ∗somHós ‘same’ (Skt samás, with the first a not lengthened by Brugmann’s
Law) > ὁμος.´
One example suggests that not all laryngeals in this position were lost without
a trace. It seems clear that the 2sg. ending of the perfect indicative was ∗-th₂a,
unambiguously attested in Skt véttʰa ‘you know’ < ∗wóydsth₂a because only the
second laryngeal aspirates a preceding voiceless stop in Sanskrit. The correspond-
ing Greek form is οἶσθα, likewise with aspiration of the inherited ∗t. Since this
form is an isolated relic, it is difficult to maintain that it does not reflect regular
sound change. But though other surviving sequences of voiceless stop plus ∗h₂ are
rare in Greek, the few that can be found do not exhibit aspiration of the stop; for
instance, to Skt pr tʰús ‘broad’ corresponds Gk πλατύς, with τ rather than θ, and
ἀκούɛ¯ν ‘to hear’ (see above) likewise exhibits no aspiration. It is conceivable that
the ending was remodeled on imperative 2sg. -θι, but there is no positive reason
to think so. The θ of ‘you know’ is an unsolved problem.
Laryngeals immediately preceded by a non-high vowel in the same syllable
were likewise lost, and the laryngeal-induced allophones of ∗/e/ likewise became
fully contrastive, but in these cases the vowel was also lengthened (if it was
not already long). These new long vowels merged with the inherited non-high
long vowels. The following examples, some with laryngeals and some without,
are typical:²
PIE ∗dʰédʰeh₁ti ‘(s)he is putting’, deriv. ∗dʰóh₁mos ‘thing put’ (Skt dádʰāti;
Goth. doms ‘reputation’, OE dōm ‘judgment’) >→ τίθητι > τίθησι, θωμος´
‘heap’;
PIE ∗snéh₁yeti ‘she is spinning’ (Skt sna yati ‘(s)he wraps’, OIr. sniïd ‘(s)he
twists’) > ∗snḗyeti > νῆι;
PIE ∗h₁ger- ‘wake up’, pf. ∗h₁geh₁góre ‘(s)he is awake’ (Skt jāgar a) > ἐγερ-,
∗ἐγήγορε → ἐγρήγορε (Warren Cowgill, p.c. ca. 1978; LIV s.v. ∗h₁ger);
PIE ∗h₂wḗh₁ti ‘(wind) blows’ (Skt va ti) > ∗ἄϝητι > Hom. ἄησι;
PIE ∗ph₂tḗr ‘father’ (Skt pita , Lat. pater) > πατήρ;
PIE ∗Hyḗkʷr ~ ∗Hyékʷn- ‘liver’ (Skt yákr t, Lat. iecur with full grade general-
ized) > ἧπαρ;
PIE ∗sēmi- ‘half-’ (Lat. sēmi-; probably a vr ddhi derivative of ∗ sem- ‘one’) >
ἡμι-;
² For the most part, examples with laryngeals and those without have to be distinguished inferen-
tially. Roots with apparently final long vowels, and words derived from them, must contain a laryngeal
because PIE roots had to end in a consonant. Inherited long vowels appear in acrostatic nominals and
vr ̥ddhi derivatives (see 2.2.4 (i)) and in forms affected by Szemerényi’s Law (see 2.2.4 (iv)). Possible
Greek examples of inherited ∗ā with external cognates are all more or less uncertain.


===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 91
PIE ∗stáh₂t ‘(s)he stood up’ (Skt ástʰāt with the ‘augment’ prefix) > ἔστᾱ (also
with augment) > Att.-Ion. ἔστη;
PIE ∗bʰah₂ti ‘it shines, it illuminates’ (Skt bʰāti) → ‘(s)he makes clear’ → ‘(s)he
says’ (cf. Lat. fātur) > φᾱτι > Att.-Ion. φησι; post-PIE deriv. ∗bʰoh₂náh₂
‘voice’ (cf. Beekes 1972: 129) > φωνα > Att.-Ion. φωνή;
PIE ∗swáh₂dus ‘pleasant, sweet’ (Skt svādús) > α δύς > Att.-Ion. ἡδύς;
PIE ∗bʰāǵʰus ‘arm’ (∗-ah₂-?; Skt bāhús) > πᾶχυς ‘forearm’ > Att.-Ion. πῆχυς;
post-PIE ∗ a mr ‘day’ (cf. Arm. awr < collective ∗ a mōr) > ἆμαρ > Hom. ἦμαρ;
PIE aor. ∗ǵnóh₃t ‘(s)he recognized’ (cf. Lat. nōvit ‘(s)he knows’, with the
meaning of the perfect) > ἔγνω (with augment);
PIE ∗dédoh₃ti ‘(s)he is giving’ (Skt dádāti) >→ δίδωτι > δίδωσι;
PIE ∗h₂áḱmō ‘stone’ (Skt á´smā, Lith. akmuõ) >→ ἄκμων ‘anvil’;
PIE ∗ǵénh₁tōr ‘begetter, parent’ (Lat. genitor) > γενέτωρ.
Note also:
PIE ∗h₁ludʰéd ‘(s)he arrived’ (Toch. B lac ‘(s)he went out’, OIr. luid ‘(s)he
went’), with augment ∗é h₁ludʰed > Hom. ἤλυθε ‘(s)he came’.
This loss of laryngeals with compensatory lengthening probably preceded the
operation of Osthoff ’s Law; see 3.5.3 for further discussion.
When a laryngeal was lost between two non-high vowels, the vowels thereby
brought into hiatus contracted. The clearest examples involve inflectional endings:
PIE gen. pl. ∗-óHom (where ∗H ≠ ∗h₂; Old Hitt. -an, Skt -ām (often scanned
as two syllables in the Rigveda), Lith. -ų , PGmc trimoric ∗-ǫ˭ > Goth. (fem.)
-o, OE -a) > -ῶν;
PIE ah₂-stem dat. sg. ∗-ah₂-ay (Goth. -ai) > -ᾱι > Att.-Ion. -ηι.
Note that in the former example the contraction product is a lower mid vowel.
There is also at least one example of contraction of vowels in hiatus with no
intervening laryngeal:
PIE o-stem dat. sg. ∗-o-ey (Av. -āi) > -ωι.
It can be seen that the result is likewise a lower mid vowel. Contraction of the
augment prefix with a following laryngeal-plus-vowel sequence likewise yielded
low and lower mid vowels, e.g.:
PIE ∗é h₁est ‘it is said that (s)he was’ (Skt a s ‘(s)he was’) > Dor. ἦς ‘(s)he was’;
PIE ∗é h₂aǵed ‘it is said that (s)he was leading/driving’ (Skt a jat ‘(s)he drove’)
> ἆγε ‘(s)he was leading’ > Att.-Ion. ἦγε.


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
92 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
That shows that the contraction was early, since much later contractions yield
higher mid vowels (see 7.2.3); but it is not clear that any further conclusions can
be drawn, since the result might have been the same whether or not the laryngeals
were still in place when the augment was univerbated with the following verb form.
When a laryngeal between a non-high vowel and a high vowel was lost,
contraction likewise occurred:
post-PIE ∗pléh₁-isto- ‘fullest’ (root ∗pleh₁- ‘fill’, cf. πλήρης ‘full’, Lat. implēre ‘to
fill’, etc.) > πλεῖστος ‘most’ (Cowgill 1965: 147);
PIE ∗stah₂urós ‘stake, pale’ (ON staurr) > σταυρ´ος.
Though the formation of the latter word is not especially clear, the root must be
∗stah₂- ‘stand’, and the Gmc diphthong can only reflect PIE ∗V(H)u. It is highly
likely that ∗h₂ was lost between ∗o and ∗i in the word for ‘shepherd’:
PIE ∗poh₂imḗn ‘shepherd’ (Lith. piemuõ; cf. PGmc deriv. ∗faimnijōn- ‘girl’ in
OE fǣmne) > ποιμήν;
the only grounds for caution are the facts that an extended root ∗pah₂i- ‘protect’ is
otherwise sparsely attested and the o-grade (as opposed to zero grade) in the root
of a hysterokinetic noun is unexpected.
It is difficult to find indisputable examples of laryngeals between a non-high
vowel and a syllabic sonorant (in that order). Developments of laryngeals between
a high vowel or syllabic sonorant and a non-high vowel will be dealt with below.
In one environment the losses of laryngeals next to non-high vowels gave rise
to a Greek rule of word formation. The first members of compounds were fre-
quently stems ending in the thematic vowel ∗/-e-/; if the second member began
with a laryngeal, or with a sequence of laryngeal plus non-high vowel, loss of the
laryngeal yielded a long non-high vowel either by compensatory lengthening or
by contraction of the vowels now in hiatus. Inherited examples do not seem to be
recoverable, but the process is still clear from some of the Homeric examples. For
instance:
κρατερος´ ‘powerful’ ends in the thematic vowel; ὄνυξ ‘claw, hoof ’ originally
began with the consonant cluster ∗h₃n- (see 3.2.4); in a compound of the
two the sequence ∗/ … e-h₃ … / became ∗-oh₃- and then ∗-ō-, whence ω in
Hom. pl. κρατερ ωνυχες.´
But from a later Greek point of view the compound is divisible as κρατερ- ´ωνυχες,
and it appears that the initial vowel of the second member has been lengthened
simply because the word is a compound. Because the trigger for lengthening was
no longer obvious, the rule spread to other environments. For instance, there is


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 93
no phonological reason why the second vowel of πρ´οσωπον  or ἐπ ωνυμος´  should
be long, because neither προς´ nor ἐπί ends with a vowel that could be length-
ened or contract with a following non-high vowel; the vowels of those compounds
have simply been lengthened by the generalized rule, ‘lengthen the initial non-high
vowel of a second member of a compound’. This rule is called ‘Wackernagel’s Law’
after the philologist who formulated it (or sometimes ‘Wackernageldehnung’, to
distinguish it from the syntactic rule named for the same discoverer). It is respon-
sible for the lengthened vowels of χρῡσήορος, ἀγήνωρ, στρατηγ´ος, Ἱππημολγοί,
τετρᾱ́ ορος, etc., which could in principle have arisen by the original sound change
(though some contain loanwords, or can be shown to have been formed much
later, and so on), as well as the length in Πεισήνωρ, γαμψ ωνυχες,´  οὐδεν´οσωρος,
etc., which can only be the result of the morphological rule.
3.2.2 Developments of laryngeals preceding high vowels
and syllabic sonorants
The development of word-initial laryngeals before high vowels is treated in great
detail in Peters (1980: 5–125, with numerous references), on which the first part
of this section relies heavily (with a few modestly different judgments).
At least the first laryngeal was lost without a trace when ∗i immediately followed
if the laryngeal was word-initial or was preceded by another ∗i. There are two
certain examples, and a third is probable:
PIE ∗h₁yeh₁- ‘make’ (Hitt. pres. 3sg. iezzi, Toch. A yaṣ) → ‘put’ → ‘throw’, pres.
3sg. ∗h₁´-hı ₁yeh₁-ti > ∗῎ῑjητι >→ Att. ῞ῑησι, with rough breathing leveled in from
aor. ἡκ- ~ ἑ- ←< ∗h₁yeh₁- (Peters 1976, and see 3.2.4); the anomalous long
vowel of the Attic reduplicating syllable shows that there must have been
an initial laryngeal, and the absence of h- in the Hittite cognate shows that
it must have been ∗h₁, of which the first copy has been lost in the onset of
the reduplicating syllable while the second has lengthened that syllable (see
3.2.3);
pre-Greek ∗nı´-h₁ih₁k-ah₂ ‘overthrow’ (Klingenschmitt 1975: 162 fn. 22 with
references) > νί̄κᾱ ‘victory’ > Att.-Ion. νῑ́κη; this was originally a compound
made to the root of the first example with a root-extension ∗-k- attested only
in Greek and Italic;
PIE ∗h₁ey- ‘go’ (?; Skt ipf. 3pl. ā́ yan ?< ∗é h₁yend), pres. 2pl. ∗h₁ité (Skt itʰá) >
ἴτε (Peters 1980: 103–5 with references).
In the last example the length of the ‘augment’ in Sanskrit suggests that the root
began with a laryngeal, which can only have been ∗h₁ because it did not color the
following vowel in 3sg. εἶσι, etc. Of course it is true that the augment is long by rule


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
94 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
before /i/ and /u/ in Sanskrit, but the rule must have arisen by sound change in at
least one relevant verb and then spread (at first by lexical analogy), and this very
common verb is a good candidate for its point of origin. Nevertheless the example
is less than certain (in spite of the supporting arguments enumerated by Peters,
loc. cit.).
That other laryngeals were also lost before ∗i is likely but difficult to demon-
strate. On the reduplicating syllable of Hom. ἰαύɛ¯ν ‘to pass the night’, which should
have had an initial ∗h₂, see below. There probably was an initial laryngeal in the
preform of Hom. ιχανάᾱι ‘it desires’ (Chantraine 1973: 360), because the cog-
nation with its Sanskrit synonym ιhate, Gāthā-Avestan iziiā ‘I desire’ strongly
suggests that a reduplicated stem ∗Hi-Hǵʰ- or ∗Hi-Hiǵʰ- underlies both forms,
but the laryngeal might have been ∗h₁, since a connection with Theokritos’ α χήν
‘poor’ is far from obvious (Mayrhofer 1986–2001 s.v. EH) and there are no other
potential cognates. It is conceivable that pl. ἰθαρ ωτεροι´ ‘more cheerful’ (Alkaios
58.18) is derived from the root of αἴθɛ¯ν ‘to kindle’, but it is not clear that that root
began with ∗h ;₂ if it was an extension of the ∗ ay- ~ ∗i- ‘be hot’ which appears in Hitt.
āri ‘it is hot’ (←< ∗áy-or), inuzzi ‘(s)he heats (it)’ (< ∗i-néw-ti), it apparently began
with a vowel (or with ∗h₁, which was lost in Hittite). Other iota-initial words also
cannot be shown to have been laryngeal-initial; the ones with reliable etymologies
that have come to my attention are ιος´   ‘arrow’ (< ∗ἰhϝος,´   cf. Skt´ı ṣus), ι  λʋ ς ‘mud’ (cf.
OCS ilŭ), and perhaps ἱερος´ ‘holy’, if it is connected with Skt iṣirás ‘strong’, which is
doubtful in view of its variation from dialect to dialect (West Greek ἱαρος,´ Lesbian
ἶρος; note also that this word and ιος´   are not obviously derived from ∗(H)eys- ‘look
for, seek’). On the other hand, there are no clear counterexamples in which a word-
initial laryngeal survives before ∗i (Peters 1980: 73–98); that οἴᾱξ ‘steering-oar,
tiller’ is connected with Hitt. hissas, Skt īṣa ‘thill’ is conceivable but hardly com-
pelling, and even if it is connected it might exhibit a full-grade root, like Slovene
ojȇ ‘thill’ (Peters 1980: 94–5). A possible example of ι < ∗h₂i after a consonant is
ἱμάντ- ‘strap’; the formation is apparently complex and questionable (cf. the dis-
cussion of Beekes 2013 s.v. ἱμάς), but it seems likely that the root is zero-grade
∗sh₂i- ‘tie’ (pres. 3sg. Hitt. ishāi, Skt syáti)—unless the word is completely unre-
lated and the equation is a mirage, which is not impossible in view of the word’s
peculiar shape.
The development of laryngeals before ∗u was at least partly different. In at least
two clear examples a word-initial laryngeal followed by ∗ u survived as a vowel,
yielding a u-diphthong:
PIE ∗h₁wéru- ~ ∗h₁uréw- ‘broad’ → ∗h₁urús (Skt urús) > εὐρύς; that the root
was ∗h₁wer- is demonstrated by Skt várīyān ‘broader’, váriṣṭʰas ‘broadest’
(cf. Peters 1980: 52–4);
(post-)PIE ∗h₂udáh₂ ‘voice, speech’ > αὐδή; root ∗h₂wed- ‘speak’, cf. Skt pres.
3sg. vádati (cf. Peters 1980: 14).


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 95
The fact that the ablauting vowel did not immediately follow the laryngeal in these
PIE roots is what makes these examples convincing; note further that in the first
example the generalization of zero-grade roots in u-stem adjectives is normal in
Greek, while in the second an e-grade root would not be expected in a derivative
of this type and a zero-grade root would be (see 2.4.2 (i)). The fact that the first
laryngeal is reflected by ε and the second by α is part of a pattern that we will
encounter repeatedly in this and subsequent sections.
A similar root-initial example in a reduplicated present is Hom. ἰαύɛ¯ν ‘to pass
the night’, which can only reflect ∗h₂´-hı ₂us-e/o- (with the zero-grade root expected
in a reduplicated thematic present, cf. Peters 1980: 34–8). It seems clear that
the root-initial ∗h₂ yielded α in this stem, and it might seem equally clear that
the reduplication-initial ∗h₂ has been lost by regular sound change; but if it had
instead become ∗a, the shape of the reduplicating syllable would be so anomalous
that it would probably have been reshaped, and ἰ- would be the most probable
result of reshaping. The reduplication could even be a Greek innovation subse-
quent to the change ∗h₂us- > αὐh- (LIV s.v. 2. ∗h₂u̯ es, Hackstein 1995: 220–1 with
references).
Other examples of ∗Hu- > Vὐ- are unfortunately elusive, because it is often dif-
ficult to prove that a word-initial sequence reflects PIE ∗Hu- rather than ∗/Hew-/.
Discussion of two potential examples will show what we are up against. Since the
first syllable of Skt uṣā́ s ‘dawn’ is consistently zero grade, we might propose for its
Greek cognate the following development:
post-PIE ∗h₂usṓs > ∗awsṓs > ∗ἀϝh ως´  (see 3.5.1) > ∗hαϝh ως´  (see 3.5.2) > PGk
∗hαϝϝ ως´ (see 5.2.2); that preform would then yield αὔως (i.e. ἄϝϝως) in Les-
bian, but ᾱ̔ ϝ ´ως  in the other dialects (see 5.2.2); the latter would survive in
most (until its ϝ was lost) but become ∗ἡ ´ως in Attic-Ionic (see 6.2), whence
Hom. ἠ ´ως  (with psilosis) but Att. ∗ἑ ´ως → ἕως.
If the preform given is correct, this noun must have belonged to the hysteroki-
netic accent paradigm (see 2.3.4 (ii)), as it does in Sanskrit. However, the long
ō-vowel in the suffixal syllable is not normal in such a paradigm; it shows that
‘dawn’ must originally have belonged to the amphikinetic paradigm, with a nom.
sg. ∗h₂áwsōs. Greek usually shifts those nouns into the hysterokinetic paradigm,
and it sometimes levels the zero-grade initial syllable of the oblique forms into the
nom. and acc. (like Sanskrit), but not always; an example that escaped leveling
is λειμ ων´ ‘meadow’ (cf. Peters 1980: 31–2). Therefore we cannot be sure that the
∗ aw- of the oldest recoverable Greek form is not an archaism, reflecting ∗h₂aw-
rather than ∗h₂u-. We have a similar problem with the family of Hom. ἀέξειν ‘to
enlarge, to increase’, but for a diametrically opposed reason. The root was clearly
PIE ∗h₂weg-s- > ἀϝεξ- —that is demonstrated not only by the Homeric form but
by Skt vakṣáyati ‘(s)he makes it grow’ and Goth. wahsjan ‘to grow’—and it might


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
96 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
be supposed that the post-Homeric forms αὔξɛ¯ν, αὐξάνɛ¯ν and their derivatives
could only reflect ∗h₂ug-s-. They probably do, but unfortunately there is another
possibility. Though ‘Schwebeablaut’, in which the full-grade vowel appears in one
position in some forms derived from a root and in another position in other forms,
was clearly not a feature of PIE phonology, ∗h₂weg- does exhibit derivatives with
the full-grade vowel in the ‘wrong’ position (Anttila 1969: 118); a clear example
is Skt ójas ‘strength’ < ∗h₂áwg-es-. Apparently such forms were backformed to
zero-grade examples like Skt ugrás ‘strong’ < ∗h₂ug-rós, the full-grade vowel being
inserted without reference to where it occurred in related words. We do not know
how early that occurred; if it began before the last common ancestor of Greek and
Sanskrit began to diversify, it is not impossible that αὔξειν reflects ∗h₂áwg-s-.³ We
will have to be satisfied with the two clear examples of ∗Hu- > Vυ- that we have.
Once again, however, there are no counterexamples in which a word-initial
laryngeal was clearly lost before ∗u (cf. Peters 1980: 63–72).
Word-internally, on the other hand, loss of laryngeals before ∗u is the rule if a
consonant or a syllabic sonorant precedes. The examples are all u-stem adjectives:
PIE ∗ gʷráh u- ~₂ ∗ g rʷ h₂áw- ‘heavy’ (Lat. gravis) → ∗ gʷr h₂ús (Skt gurús, Goth.
kaúrus) > βαρύς;
PIE ∗pláth₂u- ~ ∗plth₂áw- ‘broad’ (Lith. platùs) → ∗plth ús₂ (Skt pr tʰús) >
πλατύς;
post-PIE ∗plh₁ús ‘much’ (Skt purús) > πολύς; on the unexpected o, see 3.2.3 ad
fin.⁴
However, because the laryngeal immediately precedes the suffix in all the above
examples they are not entirely probative. Most adjectives of this class were pro-
terokinetic in PIE, with an alternation between ∗ -u- and ∗/-éw-/ in the suffix;
Greek generalized that inflection to all of them, so that -υ- in the nom. and acc.
sg. alternates with -εϝ- in most other forms.⁵ But the second alternant of the suffix
begins with a non-high vowel, before which the laryngeal was regularly lost (see
3.2.1)—and it is possible that that loss was leveled into the forms with zero-grade
suffix ∗ -u-.
Before syllabic sonorants laryngeals gave rise to vowels word-initially and prob-
ably when preceded by a consonant; the sonorants became non-syllabic. This is
called ‘Rix’s Law’ after the colleague who established that it is a regular sound
³ For a different assessment, based on hypotheses about PIE word-formation that strike me as
somewhat speculative, see Ozoliņš (2015: 63–5, 87–98).
⁴ Since the superlative of this adjective is πλεῖστος (see above) we might expect the direct cases to
reflect ∗pléh₁-u-, yet Goth., OHG filu < PGmc ∗felu ‘a lot, much’ (noun) and OIr. il ‘much, many’
reflect a preform ∗pélh₁u-. I have no opinion about this oddity; I leave it undiscussed because it is not
directly relevant to the history of Greek.
⁵ The effects of laryngeal coloring have been leveled out; thus in Attic we find only gen. sg. βαρέος,
πλατέος, etc. However, coloring seems to be preserved in the place name Πλάταια (Beekes 2013 s.v.
πλατύς).


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 97
change. Examples with word-initial ∗h₂R - are most numerous (Rix 1970: 84–92;
I omit the less certain examples):
PIE ∗h₂n tbʰ´ı ‘on both sides’ (Jasanoff 1976: 125–7; root ∗h₂ant- ‘forehead,
front’, see 3.2.1) > ∗h₂m bʰ´ı (Lat. amb-) > ἀμφί;
PIE ∗h₂nḗr ‘man’ (Skt na ), gen. sg. ∗h₂n rés (hysterokinetic accent paradigm)
>→ ἀνήρ, ∗ἀνρος´   (with the usual Greek generalization of ∗-os) > ἀνδρος;´
PIE ∗h₂lek- ‘protect’, desiderative pres. 3sg. ∗h₂lékseti ‘(s)he wants to protect’ →
‘(s)he is protecting’ (ἀλέξει, Skt rákṣati), zero-grade root-noun ∗h₂lk- ‘pro-
tection’ in Hom. dat. ἀλκὶ (πεποιθ ως)´ ‘(relying on his) defensive capability’;
PIE ∗h₂r ǵrós ‘white’ (Skt rjrás  ‘flashing; fleeting’) > ∗ἀργροs´ > ἀργος´ ‘bright’;
for the laryngeal cf. Hitt. harkis = ἀργι-, probably also with zero-grade root;
PIE ∗h₂ˊr  tḱos ‘bear’ (Hitt. hartaggas, Skt ˊr  kṣas) > ἄρκτος;
PIE pres. ∗h₂r -nu- mid. ‘be getting (a share of )’ (3sg. Arm. aṙnow ‘(s)he takes’,
Av. subj. ərənauuataē-ca ‘and he shall partake’) > ἄρνυσθαι ‘to gain, to earn,
to win’; note that inherited presents in ∗-néw- ~ -nu- normally exhibit zero-
grade roots.
In all these examples a full-grade root can be excluded because the vowel of the
full grade was in a different position in the root (‘man’, ‘strength’) and/or because
a zero grade is actually attested in Indo-Iranian (‘white’, ‘bear’, ‘gain’) and/or is
expected on morphological grounds (‘on both sides’, ‘man’s’, ‘strength’, ‘white’,
‘gain’). Of course for the examples with αρ and αλ we could propose that the
laryngeal was simply lost and the syllabic sonorant developed normally, since it is
plausible that syllabic liquids might regularly yield those sequences (rather than ρα
and λα) word-initially in most Greek dialects (see 5.4.1 (ii)). But that hypothesis
cannot account for the two examples with syllabic nasals, which normally became
α word-initially before a consonant (see 3.3).
Moreover, there are three solid examples in which word-initial ∗h₃R - yielded
ὀR- (even in dialects in which syllabic liquids normally acquired α-vοwels; Rix
1970: 92–7):
PIE ∗h nób₃ʰ- ‘navel’ (Skt na b isʰ, OE nafela), zero grade in deriv. ∗h₃n bʰ-lH- >
ὀμφαλος´ (cf. Lat. umbilīcus, OIr. imbliu with further suffixes);
PIE pres. ∗h₃r -néw- ~ ∗h₃r -nu- ‘cause (things) to rise’ (cf. Lat. orīrī ‘to rise’; also
Skt r ṇóti ‘(s)he makes it move’?—but there is at least one other root that the
Skt verb could reflect; on the other hand, the causative meaning of this suffix
is an archaism) > mid. ὄρνυσθαι ‘to be rising’;
PIE verbal adj. ∗h₃r tós ‘risen, up’ (Lat. ortus) in κονι-ορτος´ ‘dust-cloud’.⁶
⁶ The alternative to Rix’s analysis of these forms of ‘rise’ involves positing that a full-grade ὀρ-,
whatever its etymology might be, has been leveled through the paradigm of the verb, which for early


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
98 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
(The other examples adduced by Rix could involve morphological remodeling or
leveling of ablaut grades.)
Finally, there is a probable example with ∗h₁ (Rix 1970: 97–8), though the facts
require some discussion. A PIE athematic present ∗h₁rew- ‘ask’ probably survives
in Hom. ἐρείομεν ‘let’s ask’ at Il. 1.62 (with metrical lengthening to ɛ¯ of the vowel
of the midmost of five successive light syllables, Chantraine 1973: 297), and a the-
matized ∗h₁réw-e/o- is well attested in Hom. ἐρέεσθαι. It follows that the thematic
aorist, Att. ἐρέσθαι = Ion. ɛ ρέσθαι < ∗ἐρϝέσθαι⁷ (see 7.2.2) must reflect zero-grade
∗h₁r w-é/ó-, with ε as the effective reflex of the laryngeal according to the pat-
tern exemplified above. There are no clear cognates in other IE languages,⁸ but
the phonological pattern shows that the root was part of the language at a date
when laryngeals were still separate phonemes. We will encounter several other
such roots below.
Whether Rix’s Law operated on laryngeals immediately preceded by consonants
is less clear, largely because potential examples are difficult to find. The most plau-
sible examples are the active 3pl. forms of reduplicated athematic presents. That
is because they originally exhibited a zero-grade 3pl. ending ∗ -n ̥ti, to judge from
their reflexes in Sanskrit and Avestan⁹—unlike athematic root presents, most of
which had accented endings except in the active singular, and so should have
exhibited a full-grade 3pl. ending ∗-énti, before which root-final laryngeals would
simply have been lost (see 3.2.1). That is, the PIE forms were ∗dʰé-dʰh₁-n ̥ti ‘they
are putting’ (Skt dádʰati), ∗dé-dh₃-n ̥ti ‘they are giving’ (Skt dádati), ∗stı´-sth₂-n ̥ti
‘they are standing up’, yielding Proto-Greek ∗τίθεντι (see 4.2.1 (i) on the redupli-
cating syllable), ∗δίδοντι, ∗hίσταντι ‘they are standing (it/them) up’ by Rix’s Law.
We would expect those forms to survive without change in West Greek, and in
fact ἵσταντι is actually attested in Pindar (fr. 70b.8) and τίθεντι ‘they are establish-
ing (games)’ occurs in an Insular Doric inscription of the 2nd century BC from
Ancient Greek seems implausible. It follows that apparent Anatolian cognates with no reflex of an initial
laryngeal (such as ∗órmos ‘moon’, cf. Hitt. armas) reflect some other root.
⁷ The fact that εἴρεσθαι (ει = ɛ¯) is apparently a present rather than an aorist in Homer—note that
εἴρεαι ‘you ask’ and its compounds are attested more than a dozen times—is striking but has no bearing
on the phonology of this example; this is probably another example of the split of a single inherited stem
into a present and an aorist in Greek (Ringe 2012: 125–30). For further discussion of the Homeric facts,
see Wackernagel (1916: 120–1; who notes that the problematic aorist ἐρέσθαι is attested in Homer only
in the Odyssey), Chantraine (1973: 394 with references); on iptv. 2sg. ἔρειο Il. 11.611, which is difficult
under any hypothesis, see Chantraine (1973: 297). For a different judgment on the identity of the PIE
root, see LIV s.v. 1. ∗h₁reh₁.
⁸ It is possible but not certain that ON raun (fem.) ‘trial’ (potentially < ∗h₁rownah₂) is related; if it is,
there is no direct connection with ἔρευνα (potentially < ∗h₁réwnih₂, see 3.6.3), because the formation
is different and the ∗n cannot be part of the root—PIE roots never end in two sonorants (Anttila 1969:
36–7 with references).
⁹ Of course the corresponding imperfect form and the corresponding mediopassive forms also
exhibited zero-grade endings beginning with ∗ -n ̥-, and the active participial suffix was zero-grade ∗ -n ̥t-.
However, the imperfect and the participle were vulnerable to remodeling on the root-aorist, which had
alternating accent and full-grade endings (in the participle, a full-grade suffix in the direct cases), while
the mediopassive was probably vulnerable to leveling from the more basic active.


===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 99
Nisyros (IG XII-3.103.10). The Homeric forms should be ∗τίθεισι (∗ɛ¯), ∗δίδουσι
(∗ō), ∗ἵστᾱσι, with ∗-τι > -σι (see 5.3.1) and the second compensatory lengthening
(see 7.2.1) and the accent still on the reduplicating syllable. The actually attested
forms are τιθεῖσι, διδο˜υσι, ἱστᾶσιν, with the accent on the root. It seems clear that
the accent has been shifted—possibly by leveling from (Ionic) 3sg. τιθεῖ, etc., in the
spoken language of the poet, possibly only graphically during the transmission of
the text—and does not actually represent a contraction of vowels (cf. Chantraine
1973: 298); thus the Homeric forms are also reasonable evidence for the operation
of Rix’s Law word-internally. The only reason these forms are not clinching is that
they are integral parts of paradigms within which leveling could have occurred at
many points in their development.
It is reasonable to ask how laryngeals between two syllabic sonorants developed.
Three potential examples suggest that the outcome was VRV, and one is almost
certain:
PIE ∗ nˊh ̥₂l̥tos ‘unnourished’ (cf. Lat. altus ‘tall, high’, OE eald ‘old’ with leveled
ablaut and meanings shifted from ∗‘nourished, grown up’) > Hom. ἄναλτος
‘insatiable’? —but this compound could have been created within Greek
long after laryngeals had been eliminated;
PIE ∗h₂n̥ h₁mós ‘breath’ >→ ἄνεμος ‘wind’ with shift of accent? — but the pre-
form could just as well have been ∗h₂ónh₁mos (cf. Arm. hołm ‘wind’), and
the ablaut of the present stem could have been leveled into the noun before
the verb was lost;¹⁰
PIE ∗h₁n̥ h₃mn̥ -yé/ó- ‘to name’ (Goth. namnjan, OE nemnan) > ∗ἐνομąν-jε/ο-
>→ ὀνομαίνɛ¯ν.
The last example is the most persuasive; it is even conceivable that the Greek noun,
whose ablaut does not match that of any cognate, was backformed to the verb.
Alternatively, the original acrostatic noun ∗h₁nḗh₃mn̥ ~ ∗h₁nóh₃mn- could have
been remodeled as proterokinetic ∗h₁nóh₃mn- ~ ∗h₁n̥ h₃mén- on the model of
derived n-stems; but the oblique stem would still yield an example of the proposed
outcome, which I therefore tentatively accept as a regular sound-change outcome.
3.2.3 Developments of tautosyllabic laryngeals following high vowels
and syllabic sonorants
At least the sequence ∗ih₁, and probably also ∗ih₃, became ῑ before a non-syllabic
in Greek. Examples are few but convincing:
¹⁰ The same indeterminacy affects the etymology of Lat. animus, Oscan anams.


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
100 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
post-PIE ∗h₁´ı-h ₁yeh₁-ti ‘(s)he is throwing’ (see 3.2.2) > ∗῎ῑjητι >→ Att. ῞ῑησι, with
rough breathing leveled in from aor. ἡκ- ~ ἑ- ←< ∗h₁yeh₁- (Peters 1976);
pre-Greek ∗nı´-h₁ih₁k-ah₂ ‘overthrow’ (Klingenschmitt 1975: 162 fn. 22 with
references) > νικᾱ ‘victory’ > Att.-Ion. νικη (see 3.2.2);
pre-Gk ∗opi-h₃kʷ- ‘look at, eye (something)’ in ∗ὀπῑπεύς ‘spy’, derivational basis
of Hom. ὀπῑπεύɛ¯ν ‘to spy on’; cf. also Hom. voc. παρθενοπῖπα ‘girl-ogler,
voyeur’ and Myc. o-pi, o-grade of ἐπί (cf. Frisk s.v. ὀπῑπεύω with references).
A further probable example is:
PIE ∗pı´Hwō, fem. ∗pı´Hwerih₂ ‘fat’ (Skt pιvā, fem. pιvarī) > πιων, fem. πιɛ¯ρα;
the accented zero-grade root-syllable is surprising enough that one might consider
reconstructing the rare PIE vowel ∗ī instead, but since Av. paēma ‘milk’, etc., are
almost certainly related, I (reluctantly) reconstruct the zero grade of an ablauting
root in this word (cf. Mayrhofer 1986–2001 s.v. pιvan-). These new ∗ī merged with
the (very rare) PIE ∗ī; a clear example of the latter is
PIE ∗wīs- ~ ∗wis- ‘poison’ (Lat. vīrus vs. Skt viṣám, Toch. B wase) > ∗ϝῑhος´ >
ιος.´
Possible alternative outcomes of these sequences can be explained in other ways.
For instance, the final laryngeal of Doric ϝι ̄́κατι ‘twenty’ < PIE ∗wιḱm tih₁has prob-
ably been lost in pausa (see 2.2.4 (iv)); ζωος´ ‘alive’ apparently reflects not PIE
∗ gʷih₃wós directly, but a form into which the full-grade ∗ gʷyoh₃- has been intro-
duced by lexical analogy with the related verb; Hom. du. ὄσσε ‘eyes’ might reflect
PIE ∗h₃ókʷih₁ directly (cf. OCS ocˇi), with a development of ∗ih₁ to ∗jε (Forssman
1969), but its -ε could also have been leveled in later so as to make the form more
obviously a dual.
On the other hand, it seems clear that ∗ih₂ yielded ∗ya after a single consonant
preceded by a short vowel but ∗ia after a consonant cluster, as if the outcome were
automatically subject to Sievers’ Law (see 3.6.1). Inherited examples with ∗ ya seem
all to be nom. and acc. forms of feminines with the suffix ∗-ih₂- ~ ∗-yáh₂-:
PIE ∗pı´Hwerih₂ fem. ‘fat’ (Skt pιvarī) > ∗πιϝερjα > πι ɛ¯ρα (see 5.2.2);
PIE ∗stérih₂ fem. ‘sterile’ (Skt starιs) > ∗στέρjα > στɛ ρα;
PIE ∗plth₂áwih₂ fem. ‘broad’ (Skt pr ̥thivι ̄́with ablaut remodeled) >
∗πλατάϝjα > Πλάταια (with productive recessive accent), >→ πλατεῖα
(with laryngeal ‘coloring’ eliminated by lexical analogy with other fems. of
u-stems);
PIE ∗h₁sóntih₂ fem. ‘being’ → ∗h₁sn tı´h₂ (Skt satι ) > ∗ἐhąτjα > Arkadian ἔασσα;


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 101
(post-)PIE ∗swah₂déwih₂ fem. ‘sweet’ (Skt svādvι with ablaut remodeled) >
∗hϝᾱδέϝjα > ἡδεῖα ‘pleasant’;
(post-)PIE ∗widúsih₂ fem. ‘knowing’ (Skt vidúṣī) > Hom. ἰδυῖα.
Inherited forms with the disyllabic reflex are somewhat more varied:
PIE ∗pótnih₂ ‘mistress, lady’ (Skt pátnī) > Hom. ποτνια;´
PIE ∗sémih₂ fem. ‘one’ → ∗smı´h₂ (Arm. mi ‘one’) > μία;
PIE ∗-trih₂, fem. nom. sg. derived from the amphikinetic agent suffix ∗´-tor-,
e.g. in ∗ǵénh₁trih₂ ‘birth-mother’ (Skt jánitrī, Lat. genetrīx with extension
∗-k-) > -τρια, e.g. in δέκτρια ‘receiver’ ([Arkhilokhos] 331.2), ψάλτρια ‘lyre-
player’;
PIE ∗trı´h₂ neut. ‘three’ (Skt trῑ́, Toch. B tarya) > τρία (Rix 1976a: 75);
PIE ∗kʷrih₂tó ‘(s)he bought’ (cf. Toch. B ka¨ryāmtte ‘we bought’, Skt past ptc.
krītás ‘bought’, pres. 3sg. krīṇa ti ‘(s)he buys’) > ἐ-πρίατο.
It is not immediately clear what sequence of changes gave rise to this pattern. The
complex analysis of Peters (1980: 127–205), in which he suggests that the disyl-
labic outcome did not arise by regular sound change alone, seems to be motivated
partly by a fairly rigid conception of rule interactions, but especially by the con-
viction that ἄρουρα ‘arable land’ < ∗áro-wr-ya (see 3.6.3) can only have developed
by sound change alone. I am not convinced. It is true that τρία could reflect late
remodeling (Peters 1980: 145–6), and conceivable that the α of ἐπρίατο first arose
in 3pl. ἐ-πρίαντο < ∗kʷrih₂n tó (cf. Risch 1982: 328; not ∗-énto, pace Rix 1976a:
215 and Peters 1980: 192 fn. 149) if Rix’s Law operated between ∗i and a syl-
labic sonorant. But spread of a stem alternant from the 3pl. (only, since the other
endings began with non-syllabics) is not expected, and the clear¹¹ distribution of
outcomes among these inherited examples strongly suggests conditioned sound
change. It is true that Greek exhibits numerous examples of ∗-jα rather than ∗-ια
after heavy syllables. But a large majority are formed from nt-stems, most of those
stems are active participles, and the participles made to athematic stems origi-
nally exhibited an ablauting suffix ∗-ont- ~ ∗ -n t-, to which the feminine must at
first have been ∗-ónt-ia(-) ~ ∗-ąt-ya - with an etymologically justified ∗-y- in the
oblique stem—from which ∗-y- could have been leveled through the paradigm,
then to the paradigms of other active participles, and finally through other nt-stems
and beyond. It also needs to be remembered that ∗ἄροϝρjα was created within
¹¹ That Hom. voc. ποτνα´  θεα is an ‘Aiolism’, and an innovation, is argued convincingly by Peters
(1980: 213–15). We do not know enough about Linear B spelling conventions to say for certain that
any one interpretation of potential Mycenaean examples is correct, though the discussion of Peters
(1980: 215–17) is eminently sensible. For a different assessment, see Hajnal (2007: 151–2).


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
102 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
the prehistory of Greek, and that Greek has expanded the range of the light Siev-
ers’ Law alternant ∗ -y- at the expense of heavy ∗-i- (see 3.6.1 for discussion with
references).
In another daughter, pre-Proto-Germanic, it seems clear that regular sound-
change outcomes that violated Sievers’ Law were quickly adjusted to conform to it
(in both directions, see Ringe 2017: 144–5); could the same thing have happened
to these forms early in the prehistory of Greek? It probably depends on how many
exceptions to the existing phonological rule the new sound change created. Since
linguistic changes normally begin as native-learner errors, it is plausible to suppose
that a few apparent exceptions to the rule, perhaps not often encountered by small
children, might be misparsed as errors and ‘corrected’ by applying the rule to them.
On the other hand, if a sound change created a ‘critical mass’ of exceptions to a pre-
existing rule, it is much more likely that they would be learned correctly through
frequent exposure. Exactly what happened in this particular case is probably
beyond recovery, both because the changes in question appear to have occurred
very early and because the distribution of Sievers’ Law outcomes in Greek was
drastically altered at some point, effectively destroying the phonological rule.
The development of ∗uH before non-syllabics was more straightforward: so far
as can be determined, the outcome was always ῡ. There seem to be only three
watertight examples, but one clearly contains ∗h₂:
PIE ∗dʰuh₂mós ‘smoke’ (Skt dʰūmás, Lat. fūmus; for the laryngeal cf. Hitt.
tuhhuwais) > θῡμος´ ‘emotion, spirit (etc.)’;
PIE ∗bʰúHt ‘it became’ (Skt ábʰūt with augment; for the laryngeal cf. the Skt
full-grade bʰavi-) > ἔ-φῡ;
PIE ∗h₃bʰrúH-s ‘eyebrow’ (Skt bʰrū́ s) > ὀφρ˜υς.
At least two other examples of ῡ were inherited from PIE, namely μυς˜ ‘mouse’ (Skt
mū́ s, Lat., OE mūs, ON mús) and ὗς ‘pig’ (Lat. sūs, ON sýr ‘sow’), but it is not clear
whether their PIE ancestors contained ∗uH or the rare ∗ ˉu.
If the sequence ∗iH or ∗uH was followed by a non-high vowel, the laryngeal
was simply lost, as might be expected; thus the gen. sg. of ὀφρ˜υς is ὀφρύος, with
a short υ.
Sequences of the syllabic sonorants ∗ m̥ , ∗ n̥ , ∗l̥, ∗ r̥ and laryngeals followed by
a non-syllabic developed very differently. If the sonorant was ∗ n̥ and the follow-
ing non-syllabic was ∗y, the laryngeal was apparently lost; a plausible example is
‘weave’ (Warren Cowgill, p.c. ca. 1980):
PIE pres. ∗u-né-bʰ- ‘be weaving’ (Skt sám unap ‘you enveloped’ RV II.13.9) →
∗ubʰ-né-H- (Skt inj. 2sg. ubʰnā́ s, 3sg. with augment aubʰnāt) → ∗ubʰ-n̥ -H-
yé- > ∗ὐφανjε- > ὑφαίνɛ¯ν, with the regular outcome of ∗ -n̥ y- (see 3.3 and
3.6.3) and no trace of the laryngeal.


===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 103
The same development reappears in τετραίνɛ¯ν ‘to bore’, though that stem has
undergone even more remodeling (see 4.2.1 (ii)). I can find no other examples,
or counterexamples.
Otherwise these sequences typically developed into sequences of non-syllabic
sonorant plus long vowel, and the identity of the vowel reflects that of the laryn-
geal: ∗Rh₁ > Rη, ∗Rh₂ > Rᾱ, ∗Rh₃ > Rω (see especially Beekes 1969: 203–5, 210–16,
218–20). Probative examples are found in inherited formations to roots of the
shape ∗(s)CerH- in which a zero grade would be expected; the verbal adjectives
in ∗-tó- are the most obviously relevant category. Examples of such adjectives are
fairly numerous:
PIE ∗tm̥ h₁tós ‘cut’ (for the laryngeal-final root cf. Middle Irish tamnaid ‘(s)he
cuts (it) off ’) > ∗τμητ´ος in Hom. ἐΰτμητος ‘well-cut’, cf. full-grade ∗témh₁-
in τέμενος ‘land reserved for a god’;
PIE ∗ǵn̥ h₁tós ‘born’ (Skt jātás, Lat. nātus, Goth. aı´rþa-kunds ‘of earthly ori-
gin’) > ∗γνητ´ος in Hom. κασί-γνητος ‘brother’, lit. ‘co-gnātus’ (cf. Hitt. katti-
‘with’), cf. full-grade ∗ǵénh₁- in γενέτωρ ‘parent’ (see 3.2.4);
PIE ∗tr̥ h₁tós ‘perforated’ (for the root cf. Lat. terere ‘to rub’) > Hom. τρητ´ος, cf.
full-grade ∗térh₁- in Hom. τέρετρον ‘auger, gimlet’;
PIE ∗ wr̥ h₁tós ‘said, sayable’ (Goth. neut. waúrd ‘word’) > ∗ϝρητος´ > Hom.
ῥητος´ ‘stated, specified’, cf. full-grade ∗wérh₁- in Hom. ἐρέω ‘I will say’, Palaic
wērti ‘(s)he says’;
PIE ∗ gʷl̥h₁tós ‘thrown, throwable’ (cf. Skt udgˉurṇas ‘raised, brandished’ with
alternative suffix ∗-nó-) > ∗βλητ´ος  in Hom. ἀπ´οβλητος  ‘disposable, worth-
less’, cf. full-grade ∗ gʷélh₁- in Hom. βέλεμνα ‘missiles’;
PIE ∗kl̥h₁tós ‘called’ (for the laryngeal-final root cf. Old Lat. calāre) > Hom.
κλητος´ ‘called, invited, chosen’, cf. full-grade ∗kálh₁- in ἐκάλεσε ‘(s)he
called’;
PIE ∗dm̥ h₂tós ‘built’ (for the laryngeal-final root cf. Toch. B /tsəma-/ ‘grow’)
> ∗δμᾱτ´ος  in νε´οδμᾱτος  ‘new-built’ (Pindar Isthmian IV.62) > Att.-Ion.
νε´οδμητος, cf. full-grade ∗démh₂- in δέμας ‘body’;
PIE ∗ḱm̥ h₂tós ‘tired’ (remodeled in Skt ´sāntás ‘resting, quiet’) > ∗κμᾱτ´ος in
Hom. h. ἄκμητος ‘tireless’, cf. κάματος ‘toil, labor’, and see further below;
PIE ∗dʰn̥ h₂tós ‘fleeting’ (?; Skt dʰánvat ‘it flows’, LIV s.v. ∗dʰenh₂) > θνᾱτος´
‘mortal’ > Att. Ion. θνητ´ος, cf. θάνατος ‘death’, and see further below;
PIE ∗ḱr̥ h₂tós ‘mixed’ (cf. Skt ā́ -´sīrtas  ‘mixed’, RV VIII.2.9) > ∗κρᾱτ´ος  in Hom.
ἄκρητος, Att. ἄκρᾱτος ‘unmixed’, cf. full-grade ∗ḱérh₂- in aor. ἐκέρασε ‘(s)he
mixed’;
PIE ∗ pr̥ h₂tós ‘sold’ (for the laryngeal-final root cf. OIr. renaid ‘(s)he sells’) >
Att. πρᾱτος´ ‘sold’;
PIE ∗tl̥h₂tós ‘lifted, liftable’ (cf. Lat. lātus ‘carried, brought’) > τλᾱτ´ος > Att.-Ion.
τλητος´ ‘bearable, endurable’, cf. full-grade ∗télh₂- in τελαμ ων´ ‘shield-strap’;


===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
104 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗str h₃tós ‘spread out, strewn’ (cf. Skt stīrṇás with alternative suffix ∗-nó-) >
στρωτος,´   cf. full-grade ∗stérh₃- > ∗στερο- → στορε- in aor. ἐστορεσε´  ‘(s)he
spread’ (see 5.4.1 (iii));
PIE ∗ gʷr h₃tós ‘swallowed, swallowable’ (cf. Skt gīrṇás with alternative suffix
∗-nó-) > βρωτος´ ‘edible’.
There are also a few adjectives in ∗-ró-, for which zero-grade roots are also
expected, though close cognates are difficult to find:
∗sklh₁rós ‘hard’ > σκληρος,´   cf. full-grade ∗skélh₁- in σκέλλɛ¯ ν ‘to harden’,
σκελετος´ ‘dried up’;
∗ǵʰlh₃rós ‘yellow, green’ > χλωρος;´   the full-grade ∗ǵʰélh₃- appears in OCS
zelenŭ ‘green’, PGmc ∗gelwaz ‘yellow’ (> OE ġeolu, OHG gelo), Lat. helvos
‘bay (horse)’, etc.
Presents in -σκε/ο- also typically exhibit zero-grade roots, since the suffix was
originally accented; thus it is no surprise to find:
θνήσκɛ¯ν ‘to be dying’ < ∗dʰn h₂-sḱé/ó- vs. aor. θανɛ˜ν ‘to die’ < ∗dʰn h₂-é/ó-;
so also βλωσκɛ´ ¯ν ‘to be coming/going’ < ∗ml h₃-sḱé/ó- (aor. μολɛ˜ν) and θρ ωσκɛ´¯ν
‘to leap (severally or repeatedly)’ < ∗dʰr h₃-sḱé/ó- (aor. θορɛ˜ν), though cognates
are shaky and the o of the aorists is not easy to explain (see 5.4.1 (iii)).
A present in ∗-yé/ó- suggests that laryngeals were not lost between ∗ r and ∗y:
PIE ∗ sr h₃-yé/ó- ‘rush’ vel sim. (Hitt. sarhieddu ‘let him attack’, LIV s.v. ∗serh₃)
> ∗hρωjε/ο- > Hom. ipf. 3pl. ῥ ωοντο´ ‘they moved swiftly’ Il. 18.411, 417.
But it is possible that the laryngeal was at first lost in that position, then leveled in
from other members of the paradigm at an early date.
Finally, compounds of PIE ∗ n - ‘un-’ and roots beginning with a laryngeal
provide examples of this outcome, as demonstrated by Beekes (1969: 98–113).
Potentially inherited examples are:
Hom. νήγρετος (ὕπνος) ‘unwaking (sleep)’ < ∗ n -h₁gr-, cf. aor. ἐγρ-έσθαι ‘to
wake up’;
Hom. νηκούστησε ‘he failed to listen’, Il. 20.14 < ∗ n -h₂ḱ-h₂ows-, cf. ἀκούɛ¯ν =
PGmc ∗hauzijaną (OE hīeran, etc.) < ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-ié/ó- ‘be sharp-eared’.
A significant number of examples are made to roots or stems that appear to have
begun with ∗HC-sequences but have no certain non-Greek cognates, e.g.:
Hom. νηλεές ‘pitiless(ly)’ < ∗ n -h₁lewés-, cpd. of s-stem ἔλεος ‘pity’ < ∗h₁léwos;


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 105
Hom. νημερτής ‘unerring’ < ∗ n̥ -h₂mertés-, cpd. of s-stem ∗ἄμερτος ‘missing (a
mark), wild shot’ < ∗h₂mértos, cf. aor. ἁμαρτɛ˜ν ‘to miss, to err’ with zero-
grade αρ < ∗ r̥ and apparently /h-/ by some lexical analogy;
νήκεστος ‘incurable’ < ∗ n̥ˊ-h₂kes-to-, cpd. of ∗h₂kes-tó- ‘curable’, deriv. of s-stem
ἄκος ‘cure’ < ∗h₂ákos;
ἀνωφελής ‘useless’ ← ∗νωφελής in Myc. neut. pl. no-pe-re-a₂ < ∗ n̥ -h₃bʰelés-,
cpd. of s- stem ὄφελος ‘use, advantage’< ∗h₃bʰélos.
Though the evidence for these regular outcomes is thus extensive, some care
is needed in judging individual examples. For instance, Hom. ν ωνυμ(ν)ος´ is an
example of the inherited type of negative compound, and ‘name’ certainly began
with an ∗HC-sequence, but the laryngeal was ∗h₁ (see 3.2.4); thus this example has
at least been adjusted to fit the later shape of its derivational base. Hom. νηνεμίη
‘windlessness, calm’ is even less probative. The ancestral shape of its base ἄνεμος
is itself problematic (see 3.2.2 ad fin.), and it is possible that the ἄ- of ‘wind’ reflects
a full-grade vowel; in that case ∗νήνεμος would reflect the productive rule creat-
ing negative compounds in /nVx:-/ from words beginning with short non-high
vowels of any origin. Other examples of these compounds certainly arose by such
a rule.
Word-internal examples from roots of the shape ∗/CReH-/ are not probative for
the sound change under discussion because the e-grade and zero-grade forms of
the roots merged by regular sound change. For instance, the γνω- of γνωτος´ ‘rec-
ognizable’ and γιγν ωσκɛ¯ν´ ‘to know (someone) on sight’ can and probably does
reflect zero-grade ∗ǵn̥ h₃-, but since full-grade ∗ǵnoh₃- also yielded γνω- (as in
ἔ-γνω ‘(s)he recognized’ < ∗ǵnóh₃-t) and since leveling within paradigms is con-
tinuously possible, we cannot cite any form of this and similar verbs as a certain
example of the sound change under discussion here.
There is some evidence that ∗R̥ H-sequences could yield an alternative outcome
under some conditions. The most convincing example is:
Hom. παλάμη ‘(flat) hand’ < ∗plˊ̥h₂mah₂ (Lat. palma, OIr. lám ‘hand’, OE folm
‘hand’(poetic)).
The word is so isolated in Greek that its shape can reflect only regular sound
change. The conditioning factor for its divergent outcome of ∗l̥h₂ can only be
the fact that the zero-grade syllable was accented. But we have already seen some
accented examples of word-initial ∗ n̥ H- which instead yielded the majority out-
come; thus a further condition for this disyllabic outcome was probably that
the sequence in question was not word-initial. If this reasoning is correct, it is
possible that nouns like θάνατος ‘death’ and κάματος ‘toil’ do not reflect full-
grade ∗θένατος, ∗κέματος with assimilation of the short vowels across a sonorant
(which did occur sporadically in Greek), but derivation from the preforms of the


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
106 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
adjectives ∗θνᾱτος,´   ∗κμᾱτος´   by a shift of accent (cf. Rix 1976a: 73–4, Nussbaum
1986: 165–7 with references).
If a sequence ∗R ̥H was followed by a non-high vowel, the laryngeal was simply
lost, as expected; thus aor. βαλɛ˜ν ‘to throw’, for instance, reflects ∗ gʷlh̥₁-é/ó-, with
the usual outcome of syllabic ∗l.̥ On the reflexes of syllabic nasals in this position,
see 3.3.
This is also the place to discuss a minor puzzle of Greek sound change. There
was a PIE adjective meaning ‘long’ that is well attested in the core subgroups of
the family:
PIE ∗dlh g̥₁ʰós ‘long’ > Skt dīrg ásʰ, Av. darəɣoˉ, OCS dlŭgŭ; cf. also Lith. ìlgas
(initial stop lost), Goth. tulgus ‘firm’ (transferred into the u-stems; ∗‘long-
lasting’, cf. Lat. durˉus ‘hard’ with a similar shift in meaning).
We can be reasonably sure that the laryngeal was ∗h₁ because of a Greek com-
pound:
ἐνδελεχής ‘continual’, deriv. of s-stem ∗δέλεχος ‘length’ < ∗délh g₁ʰos.
We would therefore expect the Greek reflex of the adjective to be ‘δληχος’´ ; but
of course it is (Hom.) δολιχος.´ The source of the sequence -ολι- is unknown. It
seems possible that πολύς ‘much’ < ∗plh̥₁ús (see 3.2.2) exhibits the same appar-
ent change of ∗lh̥₁ to ολ, though this additional example does not help to explain
it. It has even been suggested that πολις´ ‘city’ is cognate with Skt pur-‘citadel’,
possibly < ∗plH-;̥ but πολις´ is an i-stem with conservative inflection, and it seems
incredible that its ι could somehow have arisen from a laryngeal, as the ι of δολιχος´
apparently did.
3.2.4 Developments of laryngeals not adjacent to a syllabic
In one environment a word-initial laryngeal before a non-syllabic did not survive
as a separate segment in Greek. Word-initial ∗Hy-, apparently with any laryngeal,
yields /h-/ in 1st-millennium Ancient Greek; evidently ∗Hy- > ∗hy- > ∗[j]̥ > h-.
There are now three clinching examples, discovered by three different colleagues:
PIE ∗h₁yeh₁- ‘make’ (Hitt. pres. 3sg. iezzi, Toch. A yaṣ) → aor. ∗h₁yeh₁-k- ‘throw’
(Lat. pf. iēcisse) > ἡκ- (Peters 1976);
PIE ∗h₂yu-gih₃- ‘having vigorous life’ (cpd. of ∗h₂óyu and ∗ gʷyoh₃- with
delabialization next to ∗u; cf. Lat. iugˉis ‘ever-flowing’, Av. yauuaējī-‘having
eternal life’) > ὑγιής ‘healthy’ (Weiss 1995: 149–51; connection suggested in
Schwyzer 1939: 303);


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 107
PIE ∗Hyewh₂- ‘graze’ (cf. Skt yávasam ‘pasture’, suyávasasˉ ‘having good pas-
ture’, gávyutisˉ ‘cow-pasture’) > ∗ἑϝα- in Hom. εἱαμενή ‘water-meadow’ (ει
= ɛ¯ by metrical lengthening of the third of five light syllables; Nikolaev
2014, citing unpublished work by Jochem Schindler on the Indo-Iranian
forms).
Relying on these three clear examples, I posit ∗Hy- whenever the Greek rough
breathing appears to correspond to a reflex of ∗y- in other IE languages, including
the following (cf. Lejeune 1972: 165–6):
PIE ∗Hyós rel. ‘who, which’ (Skt yás) > ὅς;
PIE ∗Hyḗkʷr̥ ~ ∗Hyékʷn- ‘liver’ (Skt yákr̥ t, Lat. iecur with full grade general-
ized) > ἧπαρ;
PIE ∗Hiǵnós ‘holy’ (cf. Goth. swikns ‘pure’, compounded with ∗h₁su- ‘good’,
Heidermanns 1993: 582 with refs.) → ∗Hyaǵnós (full grade reintroduced
from the related verb; Skt yajñás ‘worship’) > ἁγνος´ ‘holy, pure’;
PIE ∗Hyéh₁gʷah₂ ‘strength’ vel sim. (Lith. jė́ ga) > ἥβᾱ ‘youth’ > Att.-Ion. ἥβη;
PIE ∗Hyeh₁-ro- ‘period of time’ (Goth. jer ‘year’), o-grade deriv. ∗Hyoh₁-ro-
(cf. Lat. hˉornus  ‘this year’s’ < ∗ho-jˉor-ino-)  > ὥρᾱ;
PIE ∗Hyewdʰ- ~ ∗Hyudʰ- ‘be excited’ (Toch. A mar yutkatār ‘don’t worry’, Skt
yúdʰyati ‘(s)he fights’, Lat. iubēre ‘to command’), deriv. ∗Hyudʰ-sm- with
further suffixation in Hom. ὑσμῑ́νη ‘combat’.
There is also an example attested only in the psilotic dialect of Homer (on which,
see further 3.5.1):
PIE ∗Hyn̥ h₂tḗr, voc. ∗Hyénh₂ter ‘husband’s brother’s wife’ (Old Lith. jente˙, Skt
yātár-) in Hom. pl. εἰνατέρες (ει = ɛ¯ by metrical lengthening).
By contrast the reflex of PIE initial ∗y- is ζ- (see 3.6.2).
In the Linear B documents forms of the relative pronoun are written both as jo-
and as o-. That can only mean either that the regular sound change ∗j̥- > h-was in
progress during the period when the Linear B documents were written, or that the
sound change had occurred at some time after the Linear B script was adapted for
Greek, in which case the spellings with jo-would be etymological. In either case
the PGk stage must have been ∗hj- or ∗j̥-.
Otherwise when no syllabic sound was adjacent the usual outcomes of PIE
laryngeals are straightforward: ∗h₁ > ε, ∗h₂ > α, ∗h₃ > o. Only Greek clearly exhibits
this ‘triple reflex’ of laryngeals, and that fact makes Greek evidence crucial for the
reconstruction of these PIE consonants.
Examples of word-initial laryngeals followed by a consonant are numerous. In
many cases only Greek offers evidence of the laryngeal. In some the evidence
of Greek is corroborated by Anatolian languages or by Armenian; in others it is


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
108 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
corroborated by lengthening of the final vowels of first elements of compounds or
of reduplicating syllables in Indo-Iranian. There are more than a dozen examples
with ∗h₁:
PIE ∗h₁ger- ~ ∗h₁gr- ‘wake up’, pf. ∗h₁ge-h₁gór-e ‘(s)he is awake’ (Skt jāga ra
‘(s)he is awake’) > pres. ∗ἐγερ-jε/ο- > ἐγɛ ρɛ¯ν ‘to be waking (someone)
up’, aor. ἐγρέσθαι ‘to wake up’, pf. ∗ἐγήγορε → ἐγρήγορε ‘(s)he is awake’
(by contamination with ἐγρέσθαι; Warren Cowgill, p.c. ca. 1978; LIV s.v.
∗h₁ger);
PIE ∗h₁s-ónt- ~ ∗h₁s-n t- pres. ptc. ‘being’ (Skt sánt- ~ sat-; cpd. a sat-‘not exist-
ing’ < ∗ nˊ -h₁sn t-) > ∗ἐhοντ-´ ~ ∗ἐhąτ- > Ion. ἐοντ-,´ Ark. fem. ἔασσα (see
3.2.1);
PIE ∗h₁werǵ- ‘shut in, enclose’ (Lith. ver˜zˇti) > Hom. ἐέργɛ ν, cf. also Cyprian
aor. 3pl. ka-te-wo-ro-ko-ne ∗κατ-ɛ ϝοργον ‘they besieged’;
PIE ∗h₁wers- ‘rain, fall (as dew)’ (Skt várṣati ‘it’s raining’) > Hom. ἐέρση ‘dew’;
PIE ∗h ln₁ gʷʰrós and ∗h₁léngʰu- ~ ∗h₁ln gʷʰéw- ‘light(weight)’ (OHG lungar
‘vigorous’, Skt ragʰús ‘swift’) >→ ἐλαφρος´ ‘light’, ἐλαχύς ‘little’;
PIE ∗h₁lengʰ- ‘clear oneself under oath’ (Hitt. linkzi ‘(s)he swears’) > ἐλέγχɛ¯ν
‘to cross-examine, to refute’;
PIE ∗h₁léwdʰeros ‘free’ (Lat. līber, Venetic dat. pl. louderobos ‘for (his) chil-
dren’) > ἐλεύθερος;
PIE ∗h₁régʷos ‘darkness’ (Goth. riqis; Skt rájas ‘empty space’, Arm. erek
‘evening’) > ἔρεβος ‘the passage to the underworld’;
PIE ∗h₁reyp- ‘tear down’ (ON rı´fa ‘to tear’) > ἐρείπɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₁rép-ye/o- ‘be snatching’ (Lat. rapere with remodeled root) > Hom.
ἐρεπτομενος´ ‘devouring’;
PIE ∗h₁rewg- ‘belch’ (Lat. ē-rugˉere) > Hom. ἐρεύγεσθαι;
PIE ∗h₁rudʰrós ‘red’ (Toch. B ratre, Lat. ruber) > ἐρυθρος;´
PIE ∗h₁roHwáh₂ ‘rest’ (OE rowˉ ) > Hom. ἐρωή ‘lull, pause (in battle)’.
A further example is Hom. ἐρείομεν ‘let’s ask’, adduced in 3.2.2. The large propor-
tion of examples beginning with ἐρ- has led to reservations on the part of some
specialists; they point out that, since initial /r-/ is synchronically absent in Greek
and Armenian, such an example as ἔρεβος = erek might actually reflect a sound
change by which word-initial ∗ r- acquired a prothetic vowel in those languages
(Rix 1976a: 58, Mayrhofer 1982: 186 fn. 30). It is difficult to prove or disprove
that suggestion. A possible example of post-PIE initial ∗r- which does not exhibit
prothesis in Greek is Hom. ῥίμφα ‘lightly, swiftly’, which might be cognate with
OHG ringi ‘slight’, reflecting a preform ∗ringʷʰ- (Heidermanns 1993: 445–6), but
the cognation is uncertain. In any case there is no such alternative for the examples
beginning with ∗h₂:
PIE ∗h₂wes- ‘spend the night’ (Skt vásati ‘(s)he stays’, Goth. wisan ‘to be’; cf.
Toch. B yṣīye, A wṣe ‘night’) > Hom. aor. ἀέσαι;


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 109
PIE ∗h₂wḗh₁ti ‘(wind) is blowing’ (Skt va ti; for the laryngeal cf. Hitt. huwanzˉ
‘wind’) > Hom. ἄησι;
PIE ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-ié/ó- ‘be sharp-eared’ (PGmc ∗hauzijaną ‘to hear’ > Goth.
hausjan, ON heyra, OE hīeran ‘to hear’) > ἀκούɛ¯ν ‘to hear’;
PIE ∗h₂leg- ‘care (about)’ (Lat. dī-ligere ‘to love’) > Hom. (οὐκ) ἀλέγω ‘I (don’t)
care’;
PIE ∗h₂lék-se/o- ‘protect’ (Skt 3sg. rákṣati) > ἀλέξɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂melǵ- ‘milk’ (verb; OE melcan, Lith. mélzˇti) > ἀμέλγɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂nḗr, ∗h₂nér- ‘man’ (Skt na , Arm. ayr; cf. Skt cpd. sunárˉa-‘vigorous’) >
ἀνήρ, ἀνέρ-;
PIE ∗h₂pélos ‘wound’ (noun; Toch. B pīle, A pa¨l) > ἄπελος ‘open wound’;
PIE ∗h₂reh₁g- ‘take care of ’ (intensive ON rœkja, OHG ruohhen ‘to care for’)
> Hom. ἀρήγɛ¯ν ‘to help’;
PIE ∗h₂stḗr, ∗h₂stér- ‘star’ (Hitt. hasterz, Arm. astł, Goth. staı´rno) > ἀστήρ,
ἀστέρ-;
PIE ∗h₂tug- ‘frightful’ (Hitt. hatugis) in Hom. ἀτύζεσθαι ‘to be scared witless’
(cf. Benveniste 1937).
Clear examples with ∗h₃ are fewer, as that laryngeal was less common in PIE:
PIE ∗h₃bʰrúH-s ‘eyebrow’ (Skt bʰru s) > ὀφρυς;˜
PIE ∗h₃ner- ‘dream’ (Arm. anowrǰ) > Hom. ὄναρ and deriv. ὄνɛ¯ρος;
PIE ∗h₃neyd- ‘blame, criticize’ (Skt ptc. nidānás ‘blamed’, Av. pres. 1sg. nāismī
‘I insult’, Goth. ganaitjan ‘to abuse’), s-stem neut. result noun ∗h₃néydos >
ὄνειδος ‘reproach’;
PIE ∗h nog₃ʰ- ‘nail, claw’ (OE næġl), extended ∗h₃nog -w- (cf.ʰ Toch. B pl.
mekwa, Lat. unguis) > ∗ὀνοχʷ- > ὄνυχ-;
PIE ∗h₃reǵ- ‘put in a straight line’ (Lat. regere ‘to guide’) > ὀρέγɛ¯ν ‘to reach’.
There is also the case of ὀμείχɛ¯ν ‘to urinate’ (Lat. meiere, OE mīgan, pres. 3sg.
Skt méhati, Av. maēzaiti; cf. also Arm. mȇz ‘urine’) and ὀμίχλη ‘mist’ (Lith. miglà,
OCS mĭgla; cf. also Skt megʰás ‘cloud’, Arm. mêg ‘fog’). Though the two words
have been associated by folk etymology, they are not derived from the same root;
the final consonant of ‘urinate’ was PIE palatal ∗ǵʰ, as the Iranian and Armenian
z’s demonstrate, while that of ‘cloud, mist’ was velar ∗ gʰ, according to the unan-
imous testimony of Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, and Armenian. Probably one of
those roots began with ∗h₃ and the other did not, but we cannot tell which was
which, as the reflex of the laryngeal has spread from one to the other in Greek but
been eliminated by an opposite lexical analogy in Armenian.
In at least two words the vowel which resulted from the initial laryngeal has
been (irregularly) assimilated to the vowel of the following syllable in most Greek
dialects; in each case one dialect preserves the vowel which we expect to find:
PIE ∗h₁dónt- ~ ∗h₁dn t- ‘tooth’ (Skt dánt- ~ dat-) > ἐδοντ-´in Aiolic pl. ἔδοντες
(cited by Proklos in his commentary on the Kratylos); otherwise assimilated
ὀδοντ-;´


===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
110 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗h₁nḗh₃mn̥ ~ ∗h₁nóh₃mn- ‘name’ (cf. Toch. B ñem, Hitt. lāman, Lat.
nˉomen) >→ ∗ἔνομα > ∗ἔνυμα in Lakonian Ἐνυμακρατίδᾱς; otherwise assim-
ilated (Att.) ὄνομα > (most dialects) ὄνυμα.
On the last example, see also 3.2.2 ad fin. The fact that such an assimilation was
clearly possible makes a third case exceptionally difficult to assess. There was
clearly a PIE root ∗Hneḱ- meaning ‘reach’ which had a byform ∗Hnenḱ- in which
the nasal had been copied into the syllable coda; that much is clear from the
Sanskrit forms:
Skt aor. ā́ naṭ ‘(s)he has reached’ < PIE ∗é Hneḱ-t, pf. ānā́ ´sa ~ ānáṃ´sa ‘(s)he
reached’ < PIE ∗He-Hnóḱ-e ~ ∗He-Hnónḱ-e.
But because all non-high vowels merged as a and ā in Indo-Iranian, Sanskrit
gives us no information about the identity of the root-initial laryngeal. The
corresponding Old Irish form suggests that it was ∗h₂ or ∗h₃:
OIr. pret. t-ánaic ‘(s)he came’ < ∗t(o) ānogge < Proto-Celtic ∗ānonke, in which
∗ā reflects either ∗ā < ∗h₂a-h₂ … or ∗ ˉo < ∗h₃o-h₃ …
An a-vowel is apparently attested for this root in Gk διᾱνεκής ‘continual’, but the
latter is a hyper-Atticism for διηνεκής (attested in Homer and Plato; see Schwyzer
1939: 190); it appears that the root was uniformly ἐνε(γ)κ- in Greek. The balance
of probability is that the root was PIE ∗h₂ne(n)ḱ-, and that the initial vowel of aor.
ἐνεγκɛ˜ν ‘to bring’ has been assimilated to the vowel of the following syllable, but
certainty is not attainable.¹²
It is possible, but not certain, that word-initial laryngeals before non-syllabics
failed to vocalize in highly specific environments. Peters (1980: 23–6 fn. 18), argues
that laryngeals were lost in the environment ∗HCR̥ - in Greek when ∗R̥ was not
nasal. Many of his examples can be explained in other ways, but at least one iso-
lated word seems worth mentioning here. Gk λῆνος ‘wool’ (neut. s-stem) seems
to be derived from PIE ∗h₂wl̥h₁no- ‘wool’ (Hitt. dat. hulani, Skt ū́ rṇā, Lat. lāna,
Goth. wulla, Lith. pl. vìlnos); if it is, the initial laryngeal must have been dropped
very early, so that the pre-Greek shape of the word was ∗wlēno-. However, there
are several problems with this etymology. That it is an s-stem is puzzling, but given
¹² I am not convinced that there are two different roots involved, nor that the Greek aorist was
originally reduplicated, pace LIV s.vv. ∗h₁nek ̑, ∗h₂nek ̑. It is not clear why the nasal in this root was
sporadically copied into the syllable coda, but since such a process has left clear traces in Indo-Iranian,
Greek, and Celtic it must be accepted as a descriptive fact. A further example of assimilation across
a sonorant might be present in the word-family (Hom.) ὄροφος ‘roof ’: ἐρέφɛ¯ν ‘to roof ’; on the other
hand, this root might have begun with ∗r-, in which case the initial vowels would be prothetic (LIV s.v.
2.∗rebʰ-).


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
3.2 THE ELIMINATION OF L ARYNGE ALS 111
that it is, its accentuation is expected. But in that case why did accented ∗ˊl̥h₁ not
yield ‘έλε’ (see 3.2.3 ad fin.)? After all, the word would still have begun with ∗ w
after the loss of the laryngeal, so it cannot be exempted from that development
by arguing that the sequence was word-initial. Under the circumstances it seems
best to suspend judgment. An example with a more solid etymology raises other
questions. From the fact that Att. νῆττα, Ion. νῆσσα ‘duck’ appears in Akharnians
875 as ‘Boiotian’¹³ νᾶσσα it seems likely that it reflects the PIE word, usually recon-
structed as ∗h₂ánh₂t- ~ ∗h₂n̥ h₂t- (Lat. anas, OHG anut, Lith. ántis, Skt ātı´s, etc.).
If the reconstruction is correct, the initial laryngeal must have been lost before the
change of ∗ n̥ h₂ to νᾱ (see 3.2.3). However, it is possible that the PIE word was
∗ánh₂t- ~ ∗ n̥ h₂t-, with no initial laryngeal; in fact the Greek form might plausibly
be adduced as evidence for that hypothesis, and there is no counterevidence. Note
that in this word the sonorant-plus-laryngeal sequence was word-initial, so that
the absence of a disyllabic reflex is not problematic.
Word-internally and word-finally the regular outcomes of the three laryngeals
were also respectively ε, α, and o. The examples adduced in 3.2.3 are typical, e.g. ε
< ∗h₁ in the medial syllables of τέμενος, γενέτωρ, τέρετρον, ἐρέω, and βέλενμα
and α < ∗h₂ in the medial syllables of ἐκέρασε and τελαμ ων.´ Other examples
include:¹⁴
PIE ∗h₂ónh₁mos or ∗h₂n̥ h₁mós ‘breath’ (cf. Arm. hołm ‘wind’ and see 3.2.2 ad
fin.), possibly remodeled on ∗h₂ánh₁ti ‘(s)he breathes’ (Skt ániti), >→ ἄνεμος
‘wind’;
PIE ∗kréwh₂s ‘raw meat’ (Skt kravı´s) > κρέας ‘meat’;
PIE ∗méǵh₂ neut. ‘big’ (Skt máhi) > μέγα;
PIE ∗ph₂tḗr ‘father’ (Skt pitā́ , Lat. pater) > πατήρ;
PIE ∗dʰugh₂tḗr ‘daughter’ (Skt duhitā́ , Goth. daúhtar) > θυγάτηρ;
PIE ∗sámh₂dʰos ‘sand’ (ON sandr, Middle High German sam(b)t) > ἄμαθος;
PIE ∗h₂árh₃trom ‘plow’ (OIr. arathar, ON arðr) > ἄροτρον.
A substantial majority of the isolated examples are α < ∗h₂; the first and last exam-
ples in this short list are important because their ε and o cannot be explained by
any sort of morphological change. Examples that alternate with full-grade η, ᾱ/η,
ω < ∗eh₁, ∗ah₂, ∗oh₃ respectively are of course not hard to find:
¹³ Of course a genuine Boiotian form would contain ττ; if the form is correctly transmitted, Aristo-
phanes was presumably making the word as ‘foreign’ as possible (Colvin 1999: 167, 179). I no longer
believe that this Greek word can instead be a participle of ‘swim’ (Katz 2004: 196–9); note that the
apparent Hittite cognate is actually lahhanzan-‘shelduck’ (see Melchert 2003, especially pp. 136–7, for
discussion).
¹⁴ It can be seen that the Sanskrit reflex of laryngeals in these positions is usually i, though in some
cases the laryngeal simply disappears. This is a good diagnostic for recognizing laryngeal outcomes in
Greek.


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
112 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗dʰé-dʰeh -ti₁ ‘(s)he’s putting’, ∗dʰé-d hʰ₁-te ‘you (pl.) are putting’, ∗dʰh₁-tós
‘placed’ (Skt dá-dʰā-ti, dʰa-t-tʰá, hi-tás) >→¹⁵ τίθησι, τίθετε, θετος´ ‘adopted
(child)’;
PIE ∗stáh₃-t ‘(s)he stood up’, with augment ∗é stah₃-t, verbal adj. ∗sth₃-tós
‘standing, stationary’ (Skt á-stʰā-t ‘(s)he has stood up’, stʰi-tás ‘having stood
up’) > ἔστᾱ > Att.-Ion. ἔστη, στατος´ ‘standing, stalled (horse)’;
PIE ∗dé-doh₃-ti ‘(s)he’s giving’, ∗dé-dh₃-te ‘you (pl.) are giving’, ∗dh₃-tós ‘given’
(Skt dá-dā-ti, da-t-tʰá, Lat. datus) >→ δίδωσι, δίδοτε, θεο-δοτος´ ‘god-given’
(cf. Skt devá-ttas with different first member).
Such examples are less probative as evidence for regular sound change, since level-
ing within paradigms must be reckoned with; but since they are consistent with the
regular sound changes of Greek, there is no reason not to accept them as regular
sound-change outcomes.
3.3 Early developments of nasals
PIE word-final ∗ -m became -ν in Greek. Like the developments of laryngeals,
this sound change could have occurred indefinitely early. Most examples involve
inflectional endings:
PIE ∗yugóm neut. nom.-acc. ‘yoke’ (Skt yugám, Lat. iugum) > ζυγον;´
PIE ∗néwom masc. acc. ‘new’ (Skt návam, Lat. novom) > νέον ‘young’;
PIE ∗h₂ówim acc. ‘sheep’ (Skt ávim with leveled root-ablaut) > Hom. ὄϊν;
PIE ∗bʰāǵʰum acc. ‘arm’ (Skt bāhúm) > πᾶχυν > Att.-Ion. πῆχυν ‘forearm’;
PIE ∗plˊh₂mām ‘flat hand’ (Lat. palmam) > ∗πάλαμᾱν > Hom. παλάμην;
PIE ∗dyḗm ~ ∗diḗm acc. ‘sky’ (Skt dye m ~ dia m, Lat. diem ‘day’) > ∗Ζῆν → Dor.
Ζῆν-α ‘Zeus’ with added acc. ending;
PIE ∗bʰérom ‘I was carrying’, with augment ∗é bʰerom (Skt ábʰaram) > ἔφερον;
PIE ∗dʰédʰēm ‘I was putting, I put (several things)’, with augment ∗é dʰedʰēm
(Skt ádadʰām) >→ ἐτίθην;
PIE opt. ∗h₁siḗm ‘let me be’ (Skt sya m ~ sia m, Old Lat. siem) > εἴην;
PIE ∗bʰéretom ‘the two of you were carrying’, with augment ∗é bʰeretom (Skt
ábʰaratam) > ἐφέρετον;
PIE ∗bʰéretām ‘the two of them were carrying’, with augment ∗é bʰeretām (Skt
ábʰaratām) > ἐφερέτᾱν > Att.-Ion. ἐφερέτην.
¹⁵ In this present and in διδοναι´ ‘be giving’ the reduplicating vowel ∗e has been replaced by ∗i so as
to conform to the majority type of reduplicated presents. The only present stem reduplicated with ∗ e
which survives in Greek is τετραίνɛ¯ν ‘to bore holes in’, to which further suffixes have been added.


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
3.3 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF NASALS 113
Of course this sound change also affected endingless forms of the few m-stem
nominals that existed in PIE. From those forms the innovative -ν was leveled
through the paradigms, but that process took a long time; it was still incomplete
in the Mycenaean period. The following forms are relevant:
PIE nom. ∗dʰéǵʰomˉ ‘earth’ (Hitt. tēkan), loc. ∗dʰǵʰém ‘on the ground’ (Skt
kṣám-i with deictic particle ∗-i) >→ ∗dʰǵʰṓm, ∗dʰǵʰóm > nom. χθων,´ loc.
∗χθον´   → dat. χθονί, whence by leveling acc. χθονα,´  gen. χθονος,´ but PIE
allative ∗ǵʰm áh₂ ‘to the ground’ + deictic ∗-i > Hom. adv. χαμαί;
PIE neut. nom.-acc. ∗sém ‘one’ (cf. Lat. semel ‘once’) > ἕν, whence by leveling
gen. ἑνος,´ dat. ἑνί, but Myc. dat. e-me = ∗ἑμεί, with -μ- not yet leveled and
the original dat. ending ∗-éy;
PIE nom. ∗ǵʰéyomˉ ‘winter’, loc. ∗ǵʰyém ~ ∗ǵʰiém ‘in winter’ (Hitt. giemi, Lat.
hieme, both with deictic ∗-i) >→ nom. χι ων´   ‘snow’, whence χιον-´ by leveling,
but zero-grade oblique stem ∗ǵʰim- in deriv. χίμετλα ‘chilblains’.
In most environments PIE syllabic ∗ m and ∗ n became a vowel, which at first
must have been nasalized ∗[ə˜] but was eventually lowered, for which reason I
write it as ∗ą; it merged with α in all the attested dialects except the Mycenaean
of the Linear B tablets, in which it is variably written a and o word-finally after
m (the position in which it is by far the most common in the documents), and
it is highly probable that it was still [ã] in Mycenaean (Skelton 2022). Relatively
isolated examples are numerous, e.g.:
PIE ∗septmˊ ‘seven’ (Skt saptá, Lat. septem) > ἑπτά;
PIE ∗déḱm d ‘ten’ (Goth. taı´hun, Lith. dẽšimt; Skt dá´sa, Lat. decem with final
cons. lost by lexical analogy with ‘seven’) > δέκα;
PIE ∗ḱm tóm ‘hundred’ (Skt ´satám, Lat. centum, Lith. šim˜ tas) > ἑ-κατον´
(ἑ-, reduced form of ἕν ‘one’);
PIE ∗wι ḱm tih₁ ‘twenty’ (Lat. vīgintī) > Dor. ϝι κατι;
PIE pres. ∗ gʷm -sḱé/ó- ‘step (repeatedly), walk’ (Skt gáccʰati) > Hom. βάσκɛ¯ν
‘to go’;
PIE ∗ sm - ‘one, same’ (Skt sa-; cf. Lat. sim-plex ‘simple’, lit. ‘one-fold’) > ἁ-, e.g.
in ἅπαξ ‘once’, ἁπλοος´ > ἁπλõς ‘single, simple’, lit. ‘one-fold’, ∗ἁκολουθος´
‘walking the same path (κέλευθος ‘path’) > ἀκολουθος´ ‘companion’ (by
Grassmann’s Law, see 3.5.4);
PIE non-neut. acc. sg. ∗ -m , e.g. in ∗pódm ‘foot’, ∗nókʷtm ‘night’ (Skt pa dam,
with -m leveled in from vowel stems; Lat. noctem) > -α, e.g. in ποδα,´ νύκτα;
PIE ∗ n - ‘un-’ (Skt a-, Lat. in-, Goth., OE un-), e.g. in ∗ nˊ dʰgʷʰitom (ḱléwos)
‘imperishable (fame)’ (Skt ákṣitaṃ (´srávas)), > ἀ-, e.g. in Hom. (κλέος)
ἄφθιτον;


===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
114 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰrós and ∗h₁léngʰu- ~ ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰéw- ‘light(weight)’ (OHG lungar
‘vigorous’, Skt ragʰús ‘swift’) >→ ἐλαφρος´ ‘light’, ἐλαχύς ‘little’;
PIE ∗h₁sóntih₂ fem. ‘being’ → ∗h₁sn̥ tı´h₂ (Skt satῑ́ ) > ∗ἐhąτjα > Arkadian ἔασσα;
PIE ∗tn̥ tós ‘stretched, stretchable’ (Lat. tentus ‘stretched’) > τατος´ ‘stretchable’;
PIE ∗néwmn̥ ‘nod, act of nodding’ (Lat. numenˉ  ‘will, divine will) > νε˜υμα;
pre-Greek ∗spérmn̥ ‘sowing, seed’ (cf. σπɛ́̄ ρɛ¯ν ‘to sow’) > σπέρμα, Myc. pe-ma
~ pe-mo;
PIE non-neut. acc. pl. ∗ -n̥ s (Skt -as, Lat. -ēs), e.g. in ∗nókʷtn̥ s ‘nights’ (Lat.
noctēs), > -ας, e.g. in νύκτας;
PIE 1ary act. 3pl. ∗ -n̥ ti (Skt -ati, e.g. in tákṣati ‘they fashion’) > -ατι, e.g. in
Northwest Gk pf. (κατάδικοι …) γεγ´ονατι ‘they have been (convicted)’ IG
IX-1².171.6, > Ark. -ασι, e.g. in pf. [ϝˉο]φλɛ́   ̄ασι ‘they owe’, DGE 661.1;
PIE 2ary mp. 3pl. ∗ -n̥ to (Skt -ata), e.g. in ∗wésn̥ to ‘they were wearing’ (Skt
ávasata with augment), > -ατο, e.g. in εἵατ(ο), Il. 18.596 (ει = ε¯, either by
contraction with the augment or by lengthening of a line-initial light syllable
in the transmission of the text).
If the syllabic nasal was followed immediately by a vowel or ∗ y, the result of
this development was not merely ∗ą but a sequence ∗ąm or ∗ąn, depending on
the identity of the syllabic nasal. It seems clear that the various losses of laryngeals
preceded this change and gave rise to some of the examples of syllabic nasals before
vowels and ∗ y. Examples of various origins include:
PIE allative ∗ǵʰm̥ áh₂ ‘to the ground’ (with ∗ m̥ by Lindeman’s Law; cf. Hitt.
taknā with leveled ablaut) + deictic ∗-i > Hom. adv. χαμαί;
PIE ∗ smHó- ‘some’ ̥ (Goth. sums, OE sum) > ἁμ´ο- in  Hom. ἁμ´οθεν  ‘from
somewhere’;
PIE ∗ sm̥ H … ‘same’ (cf. OIr. samail ‘similar’) > ἅμα ‘at the same time’;
PIE ∗demh₂- ‘tame’ (verb root; cf. Lat. domāre, Goth. gatamjan), zero-grade
∗dm̥ h₂- > δαμ- in Hom. intr. aor. δαμήμεναι ‘to be overcome’;
PIE ∗dh₂pn̥ óm ‘sacrifice’ (with ∗ n̥ by Sievers’ Law; ON tafn, Lat. damnum
‘expense’) > ∗δαπαν´ο- in δαπάνη ‘expense’ (collective with shifted accent);
PIE ∗pl̥th₂n̥ ós ‘broad’ (Proto-Celtic ∗litanos > OIr. lethan, Welsh llydan)
> ∗πλατανο-´ in πλατάνιστος ‘plane-tree’ (substantivized superlative with
shifted accent);
PIE ∗ nˊudros ̥ ‘waterless’ (with syllabic ∗ n̥ before zero-grade ∗ u at compound
boundary; Skt anudrás) > ἄνυδρος;
PIE ∗ténh₂u- ~ ∗tn̥ h₂áw- ‘stretched, thin’ (Skt tanús, Lat. tenuis) >→ τανα´ος,
compounding form τανυ- ‘stretched, long’;
PIE ∗h₁n̥ h₃mn̥ -yé/ó- ‘name’ (verb; Goth. namnjan, OE nemnan) >→ ∗ὀνομąν-
jε/ο- > ὀνομαίνε¯ν ‘to name’;


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
3.3 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF NASALS 115
PIE ∗ mn̥ yétor ‘(s)he is mentally active’ → post-PIE ∗ mn̥ yétoy (Skt mányate
‘(s)he thinks’) > ∗μąνjετοι >→ μαίνεται ‘(s)he is raving’;
PIE pres. ∗u-né-bʰ- ‘be weaving’ (Skt 2sg. sám unap) → ∗ubʰ-né-H- (Skt inj. 2sg.
ubʰnā́ s, 3sg. with augment aubʰnāt) → ∗ubʰ-n̥ -H-yé- > ∗ὐφανjε- > ὑφαίνɛ¯ν.
Whether the same development occurred before ∗w is not completely clear, but it
is probable. Note especially the following:
PIE ∗seyk- ‘walk’ vel sim. (cf. Toch. B siknaṃ ‘(s)he steps’) in post-PIE pres.
∗sik-néw- ~ ∗sik-nu- ~ ∗sik-n̥ w-; the first alternant is thematized in ∗hικ-
νέϝ-ε/ο- > ἱκνέεσθαι ‘to come to, to arrive’, the third in ∗hικ-ąνϝ-ε/ο- > Hom.
ἱκᾱ́ νɛ¯ν (see 7.2.2).
Of course the suffixal ν in the last form cited might have been introduced by level-
ing within the paradigm before it was split. But the few examples of α (rather than
αν) before ∗w are even more easily susceptible to explanation by leveling, e.g.:
PIE pf. ∗memóne ‘(s)he has in mind’ (Goth. ga-man, Lat. meminit ‘(s)he
remembers’) ~ ∗ memn̥ - > Hom. μέμονε ‘(s)he desires, (s)he is eager for’ ~
μεμα-, e.g. in 1pl. μέμαμεν, etc.—whence ptc. μεμαως´  ←<∗ memn̥ -wṓs.
Since μεμα- has even been leveled into position before a vowel in 3pl. μεμάᾱσι, we
certainly cannot use μεμα ως´ as evidence for the regular sound-change outcome of
∗ n̥ before ∗w. The same is true a fortiori of Hom. ἐκγεγαως´ ‘born of [+ gen.]’, which
must have been formed, or perhaps re-formed, after the root-final laryngeal had
been lost.
At some point after the resolution of syllabic nasals before vowels and semivow-
els —possibly long after—the sequence ∗my > ∗ ny. I can find only two examples:
PIE pres. ∗ gʷm̥ -yé/ó- ‘step (repeatedly), walk’ (Lat. venīre ‘to come’) > ∗ gʷąm-
yé/ó- > ∗γʷανjε/ο- > βαίνɛ¯ν ‘to go’;
PIE ∗kóm ‘with’ (Lat. cum) in pre-Gk ∗kom-yó-s ‘(held in) common’ > ∗κονjος´
> κοιν´ος.
Though ∗kóm does not otherwise survive in Greek, the latter derivation is practi-
cally certain, since it is parallel to that of another word meaning ‘common’:
pre-Gk ∗ξυνjος´ ‘common’ (cf. ξύν ‘with’) > Ion. ξῡν´ος.


===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
116 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
3.4 Early developments of obstruents
3.4.1 ‘Thorn’ clusters
The reflexes of ‘thorn’ clusters in Greek are velar + dental or labial + dental, the
latter reflecting inherited clusters of labiovelars (see 5.4.1):
PIE ∗h₂ˊtḱosr̥ ‘bear’ (Hitt. hartaggas, Skt ˊkṣasr̥ , Av. aršoˉ, Lat. ursus) > ἄρκτος;
PIE ∗tḱey- ‘settle’, pres. 3pl. ∗tḱiénti (Skt 3sg. kṣéti, 3pl. kṣiyánti, Av. šaēiti,
šiieiṇti) > Myc. 3pl. ki-ti-je-si ∗κτιjένσι, Hom. ptc. ἐϋκτίμενος ‘well settled’;
PIE ∗tétḱoˉ ‘craftsman’ (Skt tákṣā, Av. tašā) > τέκτων ‘carpenter’;
PIE ∗tken- ~ ∗tkn̥ - ‘hurt’ (Skt mā́ kṣaṇiṣṭʰās ‘do not injure yourself ’) > Hom.
ἔ-κτα-μεν ‘we slew’ (LIV s.v. ∗tken);
PIE ∗h₂adʰgʰ- ‘press’ (Hitt. hatki ‘(s)he closes’) > ἄχθεσθαι ‘to be loaded; to be
oppressed’;
PIE nom. ∗dʰéǵʰˉom ‘earth’ (Hitt. tēkan), loc. ∗dʰǵʰém ‘on the ground’ (Skt
kṣám-i with deictic particle ∗-i; for the palatal cf. Av. gen. zəmoˉ) >→ ∗dʰǵʰṓm,
∗dʰǵʰóm > nom. χθ ´ων,  loc. ∗χθ´ον  → dat. χθονί;
PIE ∗ nˊd ̥ʰgʷʰitom (ḱléwos) ‘imperishable (fame)’ (Skt ákṣitaṃ (´srávas)) > Hom.
(κλέος) ἄφθιτον.
It now seems likely that what produced this outcome was a simple metathesis moti-
vated by misperception; see Jasanoff (2018) for discussion. Metathesis is also the
longstanding explanation for the shape of the present stem related to ‘carpenter’:
PIE ∗teḱ- ‘produce’ (cf. aor. τεκɛ˜ν ‘to give birth’), pres. ∗téteḱ- ~ ∗tétḱ- (the latter
in Skt 3pl. tákṣati) >→ ∗τιτεκ- ~ ∗τιτκ- → ∗τιτκ-ε/ο- > τίκτɛ¯ν.
3.4.2 The merger of palatals and velars
As in Italo-Celtic, Germanic, Tocharian, and Hittite, the PIE ‘palatals’ and ‘velars’
merged as velars. The merger can be demonstrated only with examples that have
cognates in languages that did not undergo it, namely Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic,
and (under some conditions) Armenian, Albanian, and the Luvian subgroup of
Anatolian.¹⁶ Moreover, there seem to have been few minimal pairs involving these
consonants in PIE, with the result that Greek exhibits no pairs of homonyms
with velars of different etymological sources. Nevertheless it is possible to find
examples of former palatals and velars in approximately the same phonological
environments, e.g.:
¹⁶ On the Armenian facts, see, e.g., Schmitt (1981: 61–5); on Albanian, see Demiraj (1997: 63–6);
on the Luvian subgroup, see Melchert (1994a: 251–6, 302–3).


===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 117
PIE ∗ḱéyor ‘(s)he’s lying down’ (Luv. ziyar) → ∗ḱéytor (Hitt. kitta) → ∗ḱéytoy
(Skt ´séte) >→ κεῖται (see 5.4.2 on the ending);
PIE ∗kes- ‘comb’ (verb; Luv. kīsa(i)-, OCS pres. 3sg. cˇešetŭ) > κεσ- in κέσκεον
‘flax- hards’;
PIE ∗ḱerh₂- ‘mix’ (verbal adj. ∗ḱr̥ h₂tós in Skt ā́ -´sīrtas ‘mixed’) > κερα- in aor.
κεράσαι;
PIE ∗ker- ‘cut, shear’ (pres. 3sg. Arm. kʰerȇ ‘(s)he scrapes’, Hitt. karszi ‘(s)he
cuts off ’) > κερ- in pres. ∗κερ-jε/ο- > κɛ̄́ ρɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗ḱléwos ‘fame’ (Skt ´srávas) > κλέος;
PIE ∗klep- ‘steal’ (inf. Toch. B ka¨lypītsi, Old Lat. clepere; cf. Old Prussian
auklipts ‘hidden’) > κλέπτɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗peḱ- ‘comb’ (verb; Lith. pèšti ‘to pluck’; Lat. pectere ‘to comb’ with
t-extension) > πέκɛ¯ν ‘to card (wool)’;
PIE ∗plek- ‘plait’ (with t-extension Lat. plectere, OCS pres. 3sg. pletetŭ, the latter
with t < ∗kt) > πλέκɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗ǵénh₁os ‘lineage’ (Skt jánas, Lat. genus; for the palatal cf. Av. zīzanəṇti
‘they beget’) > γένος;
PIE ∗ gem- ‘squeeze’ (Lat. gemere ‘to sigh, to groan’; for the velar cf. Serbo-
Croatian aor. 3sg. zˇȇ ‘(s)he squeezed’) > γέμɛ¯ν ‘to be loaded full’;
PIE ∗leǵ- ‘collect, gather’ (Lat. legere, Albanian pres. 3sg. mbledh) > λέγɛ¯ν ‘to
gather; to say’;
PIE ∗(s)teg-¹⁷ ‘cover’ (Lat. tegere; for the velar cf. Lith. stógas ‘roof ’) > στέγɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗mréǵʰu- ~ ∗ mr̥ ǵʰéw- ‘short’ (Lat. brevis) → ∗ mr̥ ǵʰús (Av. mərəzu-) >
βραχύς;
PIE ∗h₁léngʰu- ~ ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰéw- ‘light(weight)’ → ∗h₁ln̥ gʰús (Skt ragʰús ‘swift’) >
ἐλαχύς ‘little’;
PIE ∗leyǵʰ- ‘lick’ (Skt pres. 3sg. réḍʰi < ∗láiẓʰḍʰi < ∗léyǵʰti) > λείχɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗steygʰ- ‘walk forward’ (Skt stigʰ-in prá stiṅnoti ‘he makes progress’,
Maitrāyaṇī- saṃhitā 2.1.12, Goth. steigan ‘to ascend’) > στείχɛ¯ν ‘to march’.
3.4.3 Early developments of labiovelars
Sequences of dorsal + ∗ w became rounded dorsals (eventually labiovelars—see
below). There are two straightforward examples:
PIE ∗h₃nogʰ- ‘nail, claw’ (OE næġl), extended ∗h₃nogʰ-w- (cf. Toch. B pl.
mekwa, Lat. unguis) > ∗ὀνοχʷ- > ὄνυχ-;
PIE ∗ǵʰwḗr ‘wild animal’ (Lith. zˇve˙rìs) > ∗χʷήρ > θήρ.
¹⁷ In this family of words, as in some others, a preconsonantal ∗s- has been gained or lost by reseg-
mentation of compounds. It is often not clear whether the ∗s- is original. See especially Southern (1999)
for extensive discussion.


===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
118 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
Other examples are more involved. PIE ∗éḱwos ‘horse’ apparently survives in
Greek as ἵππος, but every detail of the Greek word (except its stem class) raises
problems. The initial /h-/ must reflect lexical analogy with some other word, since
there is no aspiration in fossilized names like Λεύκ-ιππος ‘His-horses-are-white’,
Ἄλκ-ιππος ‘His-horses-are-his-defense’; thus Myc. i-qo should probably be inter-
preted as ∗ἴκʷκʷος. There has never been a convincing explanation for the ι. It has
been suggested that ∗ḱw/∗kw might have become geminate ∗κʷκʷ by regular sound
change. Possible support for that hypothesis is found in Boiotian τὰ ππα ̄́ματα
‘money lent’ or ‘money owing’ in a transcription of promissory notes (four times
in DGE 523); Boiotian ἔππᾱσις ‘right to own land (as a foreigner)’, frequent in
proxeny decrees (= Att. ἔγκτησις); a handful of Boiotian names like Γυνοππᾱσ´τος
(DGE 459(1).2); and ἀππᾱσάμενος ‘upon regaining (his own land)’, Corinna
654.iii.39, all apparently built to a root ππᾱ- ‘inherit, possess’ < ∗ḱwah₂- or the
like (Schwyzer 1939: 301, Buck 1955: 64, 127, Frisk s.v. πέπᾱμαι, LIV s.v. ∗ku̯ eh₂);
the zero-grade ∗ḱuh - might₂ appear in κʋ ̄́ριος ‘possessed of power, authoritative’,
which is plausibly connected with Skt ´sū́ ras ‘hero’ (so Schwyzer, Frisk, locc. citt.).
Though some of the evidence is open to different interpretations—for instance,
ταππαματα might actually reflect crasis with a vowel-initial compound, and the
consistent ππ of the compounds might conceivably be an irregular development
of μπ—the uniformity of the attestations suggests that we probably should recog-
nize a root ππᾱ- (remodeled as πᾱ- in other dialects, not surprisingly). But the
fact that this root is isofunctional with Att.-Ion. κτη- raises the suspicion that both
reflect a loanword of unusual shape from some indigenous language.¹⁸ I think it
prudent to suspend judgment.
It would be most economical to order the merger of palatals and velars before
this development, but it is not quite certain that that is what happened. Since
the PIE ‘palatals’ were almost certainly phonetically velars, while the ‘velars’ and
‘labiovelars’ were phonetically postvelars and labiopostvelars, the original system
was
[k] [q] [qʷ]
[kw] [qw]
(and so for the other manners of articulation). The development discussed here,
if it occurred first, would yield a system
[k] [kʷ] [q] [qʷ]
in which the [kʷ]-series was rare and dorsal + ∗w no longer occurred. Merger of
the places of articulation would then yield the PGk system. We cannot tell in which
order rounding and the place merger occurred.
¹⁸ The traditional root-cognation of Hom. aor. κτη-σα- ‘acquire’, pf. ἐ-κτη- ‘possess’ with pres. 3sg.
Skt kṣ-áya-ti, Av. xšaiieiti ‘(s)he rules’, reflecting a PIE ∗tkah₂-, is highly questionable (LIV s.v. 1. ∗tek,
fn. 1); the meanings do not match well, and no stem cognates can be reconstructed.


===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 119
After the merger of ∗Kw-sequences with labiovelars, ∗o became υ when between
a nasal and a labiovelar (in either order); this is sometimes called ‘Cowgill’s Law’
(Vine 1999). Two examples seem completely straightforward:
PIE ∗nókʷts, ∗nókʷt- ~ ∗nékʷt- ‘night’ (Lat. nox, noct-, Skt nák RV VII.71.1, adv.
náktam ‘at night’; Hitt. nekuz mēhur ‘evening time’ with gen. sg. ∗nékʷts) >
νύξ, νυκτ-;
PIE ∗h₃nogʰ- ‘nail, claw’ (OE næġl), extended ∗h₃nogʰ-w- (cf. Toch. B pl.
mekwa, Lat. unguis; possibly with an acrostatic paradigm, Vine 1999: 559)
> ∗ὀνοχʷ- > ὄνυχ-.
Two other examples exhibit υ for expected ∗e, which can only mean that there was
a chain of sound changes ∗e > ∗o > υ in this environment:
PIE ∗ gʷḗn, ∗ gʷénh₂- ~ ∗ gʷnáh₂- ‘woman’ (Jasanoff 1989; for the nom. sg. cf.
OIr. bé, Goth. qens ‘wife’; for the ablaut cf. OIr. acc. sg. bein vs. gen. sg. mná,
Skt nom. sg. jánī vs. gen. sg. gnā́ s) >→ ∗ gʷenáh₂ (OCS zˇena) > ∗ gʷonā́ >
γυνᾱ́ > Att.-Ion. γυνή;
PIE ∗ negʷnós ‘naked’ (Skt nagnás; with dissimilation Hitt. nekuma-nt-) >→
∗ mogʷnós (with a different dissimilation; Av. maɣnoˉ) >→ γυμνος´ (with
metathesis).
A further example exhibits the same sequence of sound changes between two
labiovelars:
PIE ∗kʷékʷlos ‘wheel’, collective ∗kʷekʷláh₂ (Skt masc. acc. sg. and neut.
cakrám, Av. acc. caxrəm, OE hwēol ~ hweogol, Toch. B kokale ‘chariot’) >
κύκλος, Hom. pl. κύκλα.
To the sound changes as formulated above the most obvious counterexamples
are Hom. θɛ¯νέμεναι ‘to slay’ < ∗χʷέν-jε/ο- (cf. pres. 3sg. Hitt. kuēnzi, Skt hánti),
φ´ονος ‘killing, murder’ (Vine 1999: 556–7); it is not clear how to account for their
apparent failure to undergo the sound change. Rounding of ∗e to ∗o did not occur
between ∗w and a labiovelar:
PIE ∗wékʷos ‘word’ (Skt vácas) > Hom. ἔπος.
Neither did raising of ∗o to υ:
PIE ∗wṓkʷs, acc. ∗wókʷm̥ ‘voice’ (Skt vā́ k, Lat. voxˉ ; for the short vowel cf. Toch.
B wek < acc. ∗wókʷm̥ , Lat. vocāre ‘to call’) > Hom. acc. ὄπα.


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
120 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
There are other υ’s in words where o or even ε might be expected (e.g. ὕπνος
‘sleep’, non-Att. ὄνυμα ‘name’), but it does not seem possible to account for them
by regular sound changes (for the former cf. OCS sŭnŭ ‘sleep’, likewise with a zero-
grade root); see Vine (1999) for comprehensive discussion (and some alternative
judgments).
Labiovelars adjoining these new υ’s were delabialized; all five examples of
Cowgill’s Law listed above exhibit that development. So do compounds in which
∗u and a labiovelar became adjacent:
pre-Gk ∗γʷου-kʷολος´ ‘cow-herd’ (for the second element cf. αἰ-π´ολος ‘goat-
herd’ with the default reflex of ∗kʷ) > Myc. qo-u-ko-ro ∗γʷουκολος, Hom.
βουκ´ολος;
pre-Gk ∗οὔ κʷιδ ‘not at all’ > ∗οὐκι > οὐκ (by apocope of ∗-ι before vowels; in
isolation ∗κʷιδ > τι ‘something, somewhat’).
So does a word which underwent (irregular) metathesis of the buccal features of
its first two segments:
PIE ∗wl̥ˊk wos ‘wolf ’ (Skt vrˊkas̥, Lith. vil˜kas, Goth. wulfs) → ∗λύκwος > λύκος.
It is not clear that this was a separate sound change. Delabialization of labiovelars
next to ∗ u was a PIE phonological rule (see 2.2.4 (iii)); we have already seen a
preexisting compound in which the rule operated, namely
PIE ∗h₂yu-gih₃- ‘having vigorous life’ (cpd. of ∗h₂óyu and ∗ gʷyoh₃- with delabi-
alization next to ∗u; cf. Lat. iugisˉ ‘ever-flowing’, Av. yauuaējī-‘having eternal
life’) > ὑγιής ‘healthy’ (Weiss 1995: 149–51),
and it is possible that new examples became subject to the existing rule immedi-
ately. It might depend on how many new inputs to the old rule were encountered
by native language learners: if only a few, not heard frequently, they might assume
that they had misheard the labiovelars next to ∗ u and learn them incorrectly as
velars; if there were many such sequences, or if at least one was frequent, they were
more likely to learn them correctly, in which case unrounding of the labiovelars
must have been a subsequent change.
Labiovelars were also delabialized before ∗ y. That sound change must have
occurred before the developments of stop + ∗y discussed in 3.6.3, because in that
position inherited labiovelars develop exactly like inherited (palatals and) velars.
At least seven examples can be cited:
PIE ∗pekʷ- ‘cook’ (Lat. coquere, Skt pres. 3sg. pácati) in pre-Gk pres. ∗pékʷ-
ye/o- > ∗πεκjε/ο- > πέσσɛ¯ν, Att. πέττɛ¯ν; aor. ∗pékʷ-s- > πέψαι with the
default reflex of ∗kʷ;


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 121
PIE ∗h₃okʷ- ‘eye’ (Lat. oculus, OCS oko, both with suffixes) in ∗h₃okʷ-ye/o- >
∗ὀκjε/ο- > Hom. ὄσσεσθαι ‘to see’; cf. ὀφθαλμος´ ‘eye’ with the labial reflex
of a labiovelar regular before other consonants;
PIE du. ∗h₃ókʷih₁ ‘two eyes’ (OCS ocˇi) > ∗ὄκjε > ὄσσε (Forssman 1969), or
alternatively > ∗ὄκʷι (with utterance-final loss of laryngeal, cf. 2.2.4 (iv)) >→
∗ὄκjε (with generalized masc. ending added) > ὄσσε;
PIE ∗wókʷ- ‘voice’ (see above) + Gk fem. suffix ∗-ya (see 3.2.3) > ∗ϝ´οκjα > Hom.
ὄσσα ‘rumor’;
PIE ∗sókʷ-h₂oy- ~ ∗skʷ-h₂i- ‘companion’ (Skt sákʰā, Lat. socius ‘ally’; deriv.
of ∗sekʷ- ‘accompany, follow’) in pre-Gk ∗ sm̥ -sokʷ-yo- ‘companion’ >
∗hąhοκjο-, denom. verb ∗hąhοκjε-jε/ο- ‘accompany’ > Hom. ἀοσσɛ˜ν ‘to
help’ (∗h- lost regularly in East Ionic);
PIE ∗néygʷ- ~ ∗nigʷ- ‘wash’ (Skt pres. 3sg. mid. nenikté), pres. ∗nigʷ-yé/ó-
(OIr. 3sg. nigid) > ∗νιγjε/ο- > νίζɛ¯ν; aor. ∗nigʷ-s- > νίψαι, cf. also Hom. acc.
χερνίβα ‘basin’;
pre-Gk pres. ∗slagʷ-yé/ó- ‘seize (severally), be catching’ > ∗hλαγjε/ο- > Hom.
λάζεσθαι; aor. ∗slagʷ-é/ó- > λαβɛ˜ν.
Since the root of ἐλαχύς ‘little’ originally ended in a labiovelar, it might be sup-
posed that the comparative ἐλάσσων ‘less’ is a further example. But the PIE
elative of this adjective was ∗h₁léngʷʰ-ios-, with a full-grade root (cf. Av. rənjištoˉ
‘swiftest’); clearly the Greek comparative was constructed (or remade) when the
zero grade of the root had been leveled through the paradigm, and in that case the
velar (resulting from delabialization next to ∗ u already in PIE) might have been
leveled through the paradigm too by that point.
3.4.4 Early developments of stop clusters
PIE ∗Tst clusters lost the first stop in Greek, as in Iranian (but not in Indic). There
are a handful of examples that are probably inherited, e.g.:
PIE ∗úd-s-teros ‘farther up/out’ (Skt úttaras) > ὕστερος ‘later’;
PIE ∗ n̥ˊ-wid-s-tos ‘unseen’ (cf. Skt vittás ‘found’ ← ∗‘caught sight of ’) > ἄϊστος;
PIE ∗wóyd-s-th₂a ‘you (sg.) know’ (Skt véttʰa) > οἶσθα;
PIE iptv. 2sg, ∗wid-s-dʰ´ı ‘know!’ (Skt viddʰ´ı ) > ἴσθι;
PIE ∗bʰidʰ-s-tós ‘trustworthy’ (cf. Lat. fīsus ‘having trusted’) > ∗φιστος´ →
πιστ´ος (see 3.5.4);
PIE ∗bʰudʰ-s-tós ‘observable’ vel sim. (Skt buddʰás ‘awake’) >→ ∗πυστ´ος in
Hom. ἄπυστος ‘unheard-of ’;
pre-Gk ∗áyeri-h₁d-s-tom neut. ‘eaten in the morning’ > ᾱριστον῎ ‘breakfast’.


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
122 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
Like most of its relatives, Greek exhibits regressive voicing assimilation in clus-
ters of stops. Examples in which the second stop was voiced are rare, mostly
exhibiting suffixes that are difficult to find cognates for, but an example that must
be old is ἔπιβδαν acc. ‘day after a festival’ (Pindar Pythian IV.140) < ∗epi-pd-∗‘in
the footsteps’, with zero grade of ∗pód- ~ ∗ped- ‘foot’ (cf. Skt upabdáis ‘with their
(repeated) stamping’ RV VII.104.17, Av. frabdˉo.drāj oˉ  ‘length of the front of the
foot’).
Regressive devoicing occurred mostly before suffixes beginning with ∗-t-, e.g.:
PIE ∗lugtós ‘breakable, broken’ (cf. Skt rugnás ‘broken’ with alternative suffix) >
∗λυκτ´ος in epic ἀλυκτοπέδηισι ‘with unbreakable fetters’, Hesiod Theogony
521;
PIE ∗ n̥ˊ-nigʷtos ‘unwashed’ (cf. Skt niktás ‘washed’) > ἄνιπτος;
pre-Gk ∗ n̥ˊ-slh  ̥₁gtos ‘unceasing’ (cf. λήγɛ¯ν  ‘to cease’ < ∗sléh₁g-, Joseph 1982) >
Hom. (Aiolic) ἄλληκτος.
Regressive assimilation also occurred before the ∗ -s- of the s-aorist, e.g in aor.
ὀρέξαι ‘to stretch out’ < ∗h₃réǵ-s-.
Clusters containing aspirate stops raise unresolved issues. In Indo-Iranian
voicing and aspiration spread progressively through an obstruent cluster by a
phonological rule called Bartholomae’s Law (BL); for instance, in Sanskrit the pres.
3sg. act. of dugʰ-‘milk’ is dógdʰi < dógʰ-+ -ti, the past participle of budʰ-‘wake’
is buddʰás ‘awake’ < budʰ-+ -tá-, the infinitive of vah-‘convey’ is vóḍʰum < váh-
+ -tu-m, and the action noun derived from vr̥ˊd ʰ-‘grow’ is vrˊdd̥ʰis ‘increase’.¹⁹ It is
unclear whether BL reflects an Indo-Iranian sound change or a rule inherited from
PIE. The fact that both consonants in ∗dʰgʷʰey- ‘perish’ and ∗h₂adʰgʰ- ‘press’ (see
3.4.1) are aspirates suggests some sort of assimilation; so does the fact that both
consonants in ∗dʰéǵʰˉom ‘earth’ are aspirates, since one or the other might have
been assimilated in loc. sg. ∗dʰǵʰém and then been leveled through the paradigm.
But most IE languages show no trace of BL.
The Greek evidence, however, is ambiguous. Productive formations do not
undergo BL; they undergo regressive assimilation of voicing and aspiration,
exactly like inherited voiced stops, e.g.:
PIE ∗légʰtrom ‘thing to lie down on’ (cf. λέχος ‘bed’, Goth. ligan ‘to lie down’;
for the suffix cf. ἄροτρον ‘plow’ < PIE ∗h₂árh₃trom (3.2.4)) > λέκτρον ‘bed’;
¹⁹ In Iranian, and probably in Proto-Indo-Iranian, BL applies even to clusters ending in sibilants; for
instance, in Avestan the 2sg. (Proto-Indo-Iranian. ending ∗-sa) of ∗augh- ‘speak solemnly’ (Skt oh-) is
(pairi-)aoɣzˇā, and the desiderative of ∗dabʰ- ‘deceive’ (Skt dabʰ-‘harm’) is (inf.) diβzˇaidiiāi. In Sanskrit
all sibilants are voiceless, and regressive devoicing and deaspiration occurs in such clusters; thus the
desiderative of dabʰ-‘harm’ is (3sg.) dípsati. That is probably a Sanskrit innovation.


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 123
PIE ∗dʰugʰtós ‘produced’ (Skt dugdʰás ‘milked’) > ∗θυκτος´   → ∗τυκτος´   ‘fash-
ioned’ (see 3.5.4) in Hom. εὔτυκτος ‘well-made’;
PIE ∗éwgʰtos ‘solemnly spoken’ (late Av. aoxtoˉ with BL cluster remodeled; cf.
Skt pres. 3pl. óhate ‘they praise’, which shows that this was a ‘Narten’ root
with full grade for expected zero grade) >→ Hom. neut. pl. εὐκτά ‘what is
desired’, Il. 14.98;
pre-Gk ∗skabʰtḗr ‘digger’ (cf. σκάφος ‘digging’, Lat. scabere ‘to scratch’, Goth.
skaban ‘to shave’) > σκαπτήρ;
pre-Gk collective ∗dʰrébʰtrah₂ ‘means of upbringing’ (cf. τρέφɛ¯ν ‘to raise
(a child)’) > Hom. pl. θρέπτρα ‘recompense for upbringing’;
pre-Gk ∗ wr ̥bʰtós or ∗ sr ̥bʰtós ‘stitched’ (cf. Hom. ῥαφή ‘seam’) > Hom. ῥαπτος;´
Hom. κρυπτος´ ‘hidden’ and κρύβδα ‘without the knowledge of ’, derivs. of κρυφ-
‘hide’, cf. Hom. κρυφηδον´ ‘secretly’.
(Note also πιστος´ and ἄπυστος, cited above, with τ, not θ.) But a few isolated
forms suggest that BL did originally operate in Greek. The most isolated of all is
‘yesterday’:
PIE ∗ǵʰ-dyés ‘yesterday’ (with deictic ∗ǵʰ-, which is the initial consonant of Lat.
hic, and the form of ‘day’ attested in Skt sadyás ‘one day’, Brandenstein 1936:
29, Schindler 1977c: 34; Skt hyás, Lat. herī) > χθές.
A further possible example is
PIE ∗eǵʰstr ̥ós ‘external’ (?; cf. Lat. extrā ‘outside’) > ἐχθρος´ ‘hated, hostile’ (Frisk
s.v. ἔχθος);
that ἐξ, Lat. ex reflect PIE ∗éǵʰs is plausible, given that ἔσχατος ‘furthest’ can be a
derivative with metathesis. A remarkable example attested in a paradigm is Hom.
πολλὰ πέπασθε ‘you (pl.) are long-suffering / have suffered much’ (3x), analyzable
as pf. πεπαθ- + -τε, cf. 1sg. πέπονθα, 2sg. πέπονθας; a mediopassive ending -σθε
is not in question, since this verb is inflected exclusively in the active (with the
exception of the future stem). The present stem of this verb also exhibits BL:
πάσχɛ¯ν ‘to be experiencing, to have something happen to one’ < παθ- + -σκε/ο-
(cf. Rix 1976a: 78).²⁰
Though the potential non-Greek cognates of this verb are questionable, its forms
probably indicate that BL was once a living rule in Greek. The forms with regres-
sive assimilation must then be the results of reanalysis; a plausible hypothesis is
²⁰ A similar but less certain example is λέσχη ‘place to relax, lounge, meeting-hall’, plausibly < ∗λέχ-
σκᾱ, cf. λέχος ‘bed, couch’ (Rix, loc. cit.).


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
124 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
that BL did not affect stop + ∗s in Greek (as opposed to stop + ∗s + stop), and that
the rule deaspirating stops before ∗s was extended to other productive formations.
Of course it does not follow that BL was inherited from PIE; parallel devel-
opment is not completely out of the question. More interestingly, it seems clear
that Greek and Indo-Iranian were both dialects in the ‘core’ of the IE speech area
as PIE began to disintegrate, and they may even have been adjacent dialects in a
chain (see 2.3.3 (iii) with fn. 37); that BL was a post-PIE sound change that did
not spread far through the dialect continuum is therefore a distinct possibility.
An assimilation similar in pattern to that of πάσχɛ¯ν is exhibited by another σκ-
present:
μίσγɛ¯ν ‘to be mixing’ ← μιγ- + -σκε/ο-, cf. Hom. intr. aor. μιγῆναι ‘to get mixed,
to have sex (with)’.
Whether this is the result of a regular sound change is difficult to determine, as
there are no other similar examples.
A handful of Greek words beginning with σφ- and σχ- have apparent cognates
in Sanskrit beginning with spʰ-and skʰ-and in most other IE languages with
sp-and sk-respectively; it is plausibly suggested (e.g. in LIV ) that these are PIE
words beginning with ∗sbʰ-, etc., possibly with devoicing of the stops already in
PIE. Not all the examples are convincing, but the following seem to be worth
mentioning:
PIE ∗sbʰr̥ h₂g-éye/o- pres. ‘crackle (in a fire)’ (Skt ptc. spʰ urjáyant-ˉ) > Hom. ipf.
3pl. σφαραγε˜υντο Od. 9.390, 440;
PIE ∗sbʰer- ‘kick’ (?; pres. Skt spʰuráti ‘(s)he kicks (it) away’, inf. Lat. spernere
‘to reject’, OE spurnan ‘to kick, to reject’) in words for ‘heel’ and the like
(OIr. seir ‘heel’, Welsh ffȇr ‘ankle’), possibly including σφυρ´ον ‘ankle’;
PIE ∗sǵʰeyd- ‘cut off ’, pres. ∗sǵʰinéd- ~ ∗sǵʰind- (?; Skt 3sg. cʰinátti, Lat. inf.
scindere ‘to split’) >→ ∗skʰid-yé/ó- > σχίζɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗sǵʰh₂-yé/ó- (?; Skt cʰyati ‘(s)he skins’ Taittirīya-saṃhitā 5.2.12) > σχα-ε/ο-
in οὐκ ἔσχων ‘I failed to cut it open’, Aristophanes Clouds 409;
PIE ∗ sgʷʰal- ‘stumble’ (?; pres. 3sg. Skt skʰalate, Arm. sxalȇ) > σφάλλεσθαι ‘to
be tripped, to topple’.
The first example is impressive (though we must hypothesize that zero-grade αρα
was leveled in from some related form in which it was accented), but all the others
raise problems of one sort or another. PIE ∗sḱ > Skt (c)cʰ by regular sound change
(cf. Skt gáccʰati ‘(s)he goes’ = Hom. βάσκει), so that in the third and fourth exam-
ples only Greek suggests anything other than a voiceless stop; in σφυρ´ον ‘ankle’
the υ is unexplained, and if the Greek word is removed from the equation only


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 125
Sanskrit suggests anything other than a voiceless stop; the last example could be
onomatopoeic. I think it prudent to suspend judgment.
3.4.5 The devoicing of aspirates
The PIE breathy-voiced stops (‘voiced aspirates’) were devoiced, the ultimate
outcomes being φ, θ, χ. There are scores of examples; the following are straight-
forward.²¹
PIE ∗bʰ > φ:
PIE pres. ∗bʰér-e/o- ‘be carrying’ (Skt 3sg. bʰárati, Lat. 3pl. ferunt, Goth. inf.
baı´ran) > φέρɛ¯ν;
PIE aor. ∗bʰéwg- ~ ∗bʰug- ‘run away from, escape’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. fugitˉ) > φυγɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗bʰah₂ti ‘it shines, it illuminates’ (Skt bʰāti) → ‘(s)he makes clear’ → ‘(s)he
says’ (cf. Lat. fātur) > φᾱτι > Att.-Ion. φησι;
PIE ∗bʰúHt ‘it became’ (Skt ábʰutˉ with augment; for the laryngeal cf. the Skt
full-grade bʰavi-) > ἔφῡ;
PIE ∗bʰráh₂tēr ‘brother’ (Skt bʰrā́ tā, Lat. frāter, Goth. broþar) > Att. φρᾱ́ τηρ
‘member of a phratry, fellow-clansman’;
PIE ∗h₃bʰrúH-s ‘eyebrow’ (Skt bʰrū ́ s) > ὀφρ˜υς;
PIE ∗nébʰos ‘cloud’ (Skt nábʰas, OCS nebo ‘sky’), deriv. ∗nébʰelah₂ (Lat. nebula
‘fog’) > νέφος, νεφέλᾱ > Att.-Ion. νεφέλη;
PIE pres. ∗u-né-bʰ- ‘be weaving’ (Skt 2sg. sám unap) → ∗ubʰ-né-H- (Skt inj. 2sg.
ubʰnā́ s, 3sg. with augment aubʰnāt) → ∗ubʰ-n̥ -H-yé- > ∗ὐφανjε- > ὑφαίνɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂n̥ tbʰóh₁ ‘both’ (Toch. B antapi, Jasanoff 1976: 125–7), ∗h₂n̥ tbʰ´ ‘on bothı
sides’ > ∗h₂m̥ bʰóh₁, ∗h₂m̥ bʰ´ı (Lat. amboˉ, amb-) > ἄμφω (accent remodeled
on δύο), ἀμφί;
PIE ∗h₃nóbʰ- ‘navel’ (Skt nā́ bʰis, OE nafela), zero grade in deriv. ∗h₃n̥ bʰ-l̥H- >
ὀμφαλ´ος (cf. Lat. umbilīcus, OIr. imbliu with further suffixes);
PIE ∗ǵómbʰos ‘row of teeth’ (Skt pl. jámbʰāsas, OE camb ‘comb’) > γ´ομφος
‘peg’;
PIE ∗albʰós ‘white’ (Lat. albus, Hitt. alpās ‘cloud’) > ἀλφος´ ‘white skin-lesion’;
PIE ∗orbʰo- ‘bereaved, orphan’ (Lat. orbus, Arm. orb) >→ ὀρφαν´ος;
PIE ∗-bʰi, adverb suffix (Arm. -b ~ -w, inst. sg. ending) > -φι, inst. pl. ending,
e.g. in Myc. po-pi ∗ποδφί ‘with feet’, Hom. ἶφι ‘with power’.
²¹ It may be helpful to observe here that the default outcomes of breathy-voiced stops are bʰ , dʰ , h,
gh in Sanskrit; f, h word-initially, but b, d, h, v word-medially (g, gu after n) in Latin; b, d, g, w (gw after
g = [ŋ]) in Gothic; b (w between vowels), d, j, ǰ, g in Armenian. In Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Celtic, and
Anatolian the breathy-voiced stops merged with the voiced stops; in Tocharian they merged with the
voiceless stops, probably after being devoiced, as in Greek.


===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
126 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗dʰ > θ:
PIE ∗dʰuh₂mós ‘smoke’ (Skt dʰ umásˉ , Lat. fumusˉ ) > θῡμ´ος ‘strong emotion’;
PIE aor. ∗dʰeh₁- ‘put’ (Skt 3sg. ádʰāt) → ∗dʰeh₁-k- with suffix of unclear
function (Old Lat. pf. 3sg. fēced) > ἔθηκε;
PIE ∗dʰóh₁mos ‘thing put’ (Goth. doms ‘reputation’, OE dˉom ‘judgment’) >
θωμος´ ‘heap’;
PIE ∗dʰérs- ~ ∗dʰr̥ s- ‘dare, be bold’ (pf. 3sg. ∗dʰedʰórse > Skt dadʰárṣa, Goth.
ga-dars) in ∗dʰérsos ‘daring, bravery’ > Lesbian θέρσος, ∗dʰr̥ sús ‘brave, bold’
> θρασύς (the latter with -σ- leveled from the former; the former → Att.-Ion.
θάρσος by leveling on the latter);
PIE ∗dʰwór- ~ ∗dʰur- ‘door’ (Lat. pl. forēs, OE duru) >→ θύρᾱ;
PIE ∗dʰugh₂tḗr ‘daughter’ (Skt duhitā́ with ∗dʰ > d by Grassmann’s Law, Goth.
daúhtar, Arm. dowstr) > θυγάτηρ (accent remodeled on ‘mother’);
PIE ∗dʰéh₁s- ~ ∗dʰh₁s- (cf. Lat. diēs fēstus ‘holiday’, ∗fasnom > fānum ‘temple’)
> θέσ-φατος ‘god-spoken’, ∗θεh´ος  > θε´ος  ‘god’;
PIE ∗sámh₂dʰos ‘sand’ (ON sandr, Middle High German sam(b)t) > ἄμαθος;
PIE ∗médʰu neut. ‘sweet’ (Skt mádʰu, OE medu ‘mead’) > Hom. μέθυ ‘wine’;
PIE ∗h₁ludʰéd ‘(s)he arrived’ (Toch. B lac ‘(s)he went out’, OIr. luid ‘(s)he
went’), with augment ∗é h₁ludʰed > Hom. ἤλυθε ‘(s)he came’;
PIE ∗h₁léwdʰeros ‘free’ (Lat. līber, Venetic dat. pl. louderobos ‘for (his) chil-
dren’) > ἐλεύθερος;
PIE ∗h₂ándʰos ‘plant’ (Skt ándʰas ‘herb’) > ἄνθος ‘flower’;
PIE ∗h₁rudʰrós ‘red’ (Toch. B ratre, Lat. ruber) > ἐρυθρ´ος;
PIE ∗misdʰó- ‘reward’ (Skt mīḍʰám ‘prize’, Goth. mizdo) > μισθος´ ‘pay’;
PIE iptv. 2sg, ∗wid-s-dʰ´ı ‘know!’ (Skt viddʰ´ı) > ἴσθι.
PIE ∗ǵʰ > χ:
PIE nom. ∗ǵʰéyˉom ‘winter’, loc. ∗ǵʰyém ~ ∗ǵʰiém ‘in winter’ (Hitt. giemi, Lat.
hieme, both with deictic ∗-i) >→ χι ων´ ‘snow’;
PIE allative ∗ǵʰm̥ áh₂ ‘to the ground’ (cf. Av. gen. zəmoˉ for the shape of the root)
+ deictic ∗-i > Hom. adv. χαμαί;
PIE ∗ǵʰáns- ‘goose’ (Skt haṃsás ‘swan’, OHG gans) > χᾱ́ ν > Att.-Ion. χήν;
PIE ∗ǵʰésr- ‘hand’ (Hitt. kissar; Skt hástas with innovative 2nd syllable) > χɛ̄́ ρ;
PIE ∗ǵʰew- ‘pour’ (pres. 3sg. Toch. B kuṣa¨ṃ, Skt juhóti ‘(s)he sacrifices’, both
with stem-forming affixes) > ∗χέϝɛ¯ν > χɛ˜ν;
(post-)PIE ∗ǵʰéslom ‘thousand’(Skt sa-hásram), deriv. ∗ǵʰéslio- in Ionic gen. pl.
χειλίων (ει = ɛ¯) DGE 688.D.12, Thessalian acc. pl. fem. χέλλιας DGE 614.29;
PIE ∗mréǵʰu- ~ ∗ mr̥ ǵʰéw- ‘short’ (Lat. brevis) → ∗ mr̥ ǵʰús (Av. mərəzu-) >
βραχύς;
PIE ∗leyǵʰ- ‘lick’ (Skt pres. 3sg. réḍʰi < ∗láiẓʰḍʰi < ∗léyǵʰti) > λείχɛ¯ν;
PIE pres. ∗(h₃)méyǵʰ-e/o- ‘be urinating’ (Skt 3sg. méhati, inf. Lat. meiere, OE
mīgan) > ὀμείχɛ¯ν Hesiod Works and Days 727;


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 127
PIE ∗seǵʰ- ‘hold’ (cf. Skt sáhas ‘power, dominance’) > ἔχɛ¯ν ‘to hold, to have’;
PIE pres. ∗h₂ánǵʰ-e/o- ‘be strangling’ (Lat. angere) > ἄγχɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗spérǵʰ- ~ ∗ spr̥ ǵʰ- ‘hurry’ (Skt spr̥ háyati ‘(s)he craves’) > σπέρχεσθαι.
PIE ∗ gʰ > χ:²²
PIE ∗ gʰeluh₂- ‘tortoise’ (Russian CS zˇely) > χέλῡς;
PIE ∗ gʰay… ‘long hair’ (Av. gaēsuš ‘curly-haired’) > Hom. χαίτη;
PIE ∗steygʰ- ‘walk forward’ (Skt stigʰ-in prá stiṅnoti ‘he makes progress’,
Maitrāyaṇī- saṃhitā 2.1.12, Goth. steigan ‘to ascend’) > στείχɛ¯ν ‘to march’;
PIE ∗ ewgʰ- ‘speak solemnly’ (Gatha-Av. 3sg. aogədā ‘(s)he said’, Skt pres.
3pl. óhate ‘they praise’) > εὔχεσθαι ‘to pray’, Myc. e-u-ke-to ‘she declares
formally’;
PIE ∗legʰ- ‘lie down’ (Goth. inf. ligan, OCS pres. 3sg. lezˇitŭ) in ∗légʰos ‘act of
lying down’ > λέχος ‘bed’;
PIE ∗h₁léngʰu- ~ ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰéw- ‘light(weight)’ (Skt ragʰús ‘swift’) > ἐλαχύς
‘little’;
PIE ∗(h₃)migʰláh₂ (Lith. miglà, OCS mĭgla; cf. Skt megʰás ‘cloud’) > ὀμίχλη
‘mist’.
PIE ∗ gʷʰ > ∗χʷ > φ ~ θ (~ χ, see 3.4.3):
PIE ∗ gʷʰen- ‘kill’ (3sg. Hitt. kuēnzi, Skt hánti, ‘(s)he kills’) > Hom. pres.
θɛ¯νέμεναι; o-grade action noun ∗ gʷʰónos ‘killing’ (cf. OE bana ‘slayer’) >
φονος;´  zero-grade∗ gʷʰn̥ - > φα- in Hom. pf. πέ-φα-ται ‘he is slain’;
PIE ∗ gʷʰer- ‘be warm’ (∗ gʷʰórmos ‘heat’ > Skt gʰarmás) > θέρεσθαι; ε leveled
into adj. θερμος´ ‘warm’ (≈ Arm. ǰerm);
PIE pres. ∗snéygʷʰ-e/o- ‘to snow’ (OHG inf. snīwan, Old Lat. 3sg. nīvit) >
νείφɛ¯ν; zero-grade noun ∗snigʷʰ- ‘snow’ (Lat. nix, niv-) > Hom. acc. νίφα;
PIE ∗h₃ḗgʷʰis ~ ∗h₃ógʷʰi- ‘snake’ (Arm izˇ, Skt áhis) > ὄφις;
PIE ∗sóngʷʰos ‘chanting’ vel sim. (Goth. saggws ‘song’), coll. ∗ songʷʰáh₂ >
∗hονχʷᾱ́ > ὀμφή ‘oracular voice’;
PIE ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰrós ‘light(weight)’ (OHG lungar ‘vigorous’) > ἐλαφρος´ ‘light’;
PIE ∗ negʷʰrós ‘kidney’ (Lat. dial. pl. nefrˉonēs, nebrundinēs, OHG nioro, all
extended as n-stems) > νεφρ´ος.
Further examples will be adduced in the discussion of Grassmann’s Law (3.5.4).
Miller (1977) has demonstrated convincingly that devoicing preceded Grass-
mann’s Law and that no reordering of rules occurred.
There is a persistent claim that breathy-voiced stops became plain-voiced stops
in Greek when immediately preceded by nasals (cf. e.g. Miller 1977: 137–8). But
²² It is customary to reconstruct with velars words which have no reflexes in the daughters that
distinguish palatals from velars (Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Armenian, Albanian, and the Luvian sub-
group of Anatolian). I have avoided such examples here, with the result that few word-initial examples
can be cited.


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
128 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
the examples γομφος,´ ἄνθος, ἄγχɛ¯ν, and ὀμφή (among others) show that devoic-
ing occurred regularly after nasals—regardless of accent or any other conditioning
factor—since their voiceless aspirates cannot be the result of any kind of leveling
or lexical analogy;²³ and positing an irregular (‘sporadic’) sound change is unac-
ceptable unless the evidence in favor of an etymology is absolutely ineluctable,
since the historical record shows that the regularity of sound change is statisti-
cally overwhelming. I therefore reject the traditional connection of θάμβος with
τάφος, both ‘astonishment’; of θρομβος´ ‘clot, lump’ with τρέφεσθαι ‘to coagulate’,
and so on (pace Schwyzer 1939: 333)—unless the words with voiced stops were
borrowed from some other language, or folk etymology is in question. Worst of all
is the attempt to connect θιγγάνɛ¯ν, aor. θιγɛ˜ν ‘to touch’ with Lat. fingere ‘to make
(out of clay)’. The meanings of the words are quite different; the nasal appears only
in the present, so leveling of -γ- into the aorist would have to be posited; and finally,
the apparently parallel nasal infix of Lat. fingere is clearly an innovation, since it
is restricted to Italo-Celtic (see LIV s.v. ∗dʰei ̯ ̑g ʰ)²⁴ and a root-present for this verb
is securely reconstructable for PIE (cf. Skt 3sg. dégdʰi, 3pl. dihánti, Goth. ptc. dat.
þamma digandin ‘to the one who made (the pot)’).
3.4.6 Loss of ∗t and ∗tʰ before final ∗-i
In the context of a discussion of PIE thematic verb endings Warren Cowgill pro-
posed an unusual sound change for Greek (Cowgill 1985a: 99–103); a longer
version of the same article published posthumously includes a further argument
in its favor (Cowgill 2006b: 536–45). Yet another argument in favor of Cowgill’s
hypothesis can be made from the accent of some of the relevant forms, and for
that reason I have come to believe that it is correct. This section is a summary of
Cowgill’s work, with the additional argument from accent.
The PIE active thematic primary 3sg. ending is solidly reconstructable as ∗-e-ti
(see 2.3.3 (iii), 4.2.6):
PIE ∗-eti > Hitt. -ezzi, Skt -ati, Lat. -it, OCS -etŭ, Goth. -iþ;
²³ Miller’s suggestion (loc. cit.) that this sound change occurred only when the consonant cluster
was derived, not underlying, can hardly be correct, as there is no convincing way to analyze any of the
consonants as an affix; nouns were not derived with a nasal infix in PIE. Note further that while the
claimed examples cited immediately below must have evaded Grassmann’ Law (see 3.5.4), the claimed
example πύνδαξ has not (cf. πυθμήν ‘bottom of a jar’, Skt budʰnás ‘bottom’). I remain unconvinced by
the reasoning of Miller (2014: 23; with references), which in my opinion goes well beyond what the
facts will support; note especially that the laryngeal internal to γομφος´ posited by Nikolaev (as cited
by Miller) should have been lost already in PIE (see 2.2.4 (i) ad fin.), but evidence for deaspiration is
even less persuasive for PIE than for Greek.
²⁴ That Arm. dizanel ‘to heap up’ reflects a nasal-infixed present is possible but cannot be demon-
strated.


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
3.4 E ARLY DEVELOPMENTS OF OBSTRUENTS 129
but the Greek ending is -ει, with no reflex of ∗t. It is true that Arm. 3sg. -ȇ
also reflects earlier ∗-ey, but in Armenian ∗t between vowels normally disappears
(see e.g. Schmitt 1981: 59); thus berȇ ‘(s)he is carrying’ < ∗bʰéreti is no different
from hayr ‘father’ < ∗ph₂tḗr or bay ‘word’ < ∗bʰh₂tı´s (cf. φάτις ‘speech, saying,
oracular voice’), and 3sg. -ȇ does not support a preform of -ει with no ∗t.
Cowgill’s solution is to propose a regular sound change by which word-final
∗-eti > -ει at an early date, almost certainly in Proto-Greek; but such a proposal
must be both supported by further examples and constrained so as not to apply to
obvious counterexamples. One other example of a verb ending seems clear, pro-
vided that the sound change also applied to ∗tʰ after the devoicing of aspirates (see
3.4.5):
pre-Gk ∗δίδοθι ‘give (several or continuously)!’ > δίδοι, attested in Boiotian
(DGE 538.4), literary Doric (Pindar Olympian I.85, etc.), and possibly in
Corinthian (cf. Bechtel 1923: 265; not in DGE).
Examples from other word classes will be adduced below, since they require more
discussion.
But there are also numerous examples of ∗-ti and ∗-tʰi which did not lose their
stops, and Cowgill’s proposed sound change must be formulated so as to exclude
them. He notes that they fall into the following categories:
1) the vowel preceding the stop was high, e.g. in ἴθι ‘go!’ and ∗πέρυτι ‘last year’
(cf. Skt parút) > Att. πέρυσι;
2) a diphthong preceded the stop, e.g. in εἶτι ‘(s)he’s going’;
3) the vowel preceding the stop was long, e.g. in τίθητι, δίδωτι, etc.;
4) the vowel preceding the stop was nasalized, e.g. in pf. 3pl. ∗-ąτι > West Greek
-ατι, Arkadian -ασι;
5) the vowel preceding the stop was short, non-high, and not nasalized, but
was accented, e.g. in ἔτι ‘yet, still’ and φάθι ‘say!’;
6) the relevant sequence was preceded by a consonant, e.g. in ἐστι, ἀντί, 3pl.
-ντι, etc.
That is, ∗t and ∗tʰ were lost only between short non-high non-nasalized unac-
cented vowels and word-final ∗-i. Therefore the sound change must have occurred
when most finite verb forms were either unaccented or had acquired recessive
accent (see 4.2.8).
Cowgill initially expressed ‘considerable qualms’ about his proposal ‘both
because of its complex, rather arbitrary-seeming conditioning, and because Greek
does not ordinarily lose intervocalic stops’ (Cowgill 1985a: 103). But the second
reservation can be dismissed out of hand. Loss of ∗t is widely attested in other lan-
guages; as Agnes Korn and Martin Ku¨mmel remind me, within the IE family it


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
130 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
occurred not only in French and Armenian, but also in Khotanese and in many
Middle and Modern Indic languages. It is even possible to suggest a scenario that
would fit into the prehistory of Greek in an interesting way: these stops might have
become ∗s before the change of ∗s to ∗h (see 3.5.1), thus participating in that change
and the subsequent loss of intervocalic ∗h (see 7.2.3); in that case the first stage of
this sequence of changes could have been the leading edge of the more general
change of voiceless dentals to σ which went to completion later, especially but not
only in South Greek (see 5.3.1).
The narrow conditioning of the change is indeed more surprising. However,
two other distributional facts argue strongly that Cowgill was right.
The first distributional support was adduced in the longer version of Cowgill’s
article (Cowgill 2006b: 539–41). According to Cowgill’s hypothesis, athe-
matic subjunctive 3sg. ∗-eti should have become -ει (actually attested in early
Ionic inscriptions), while thematic subjunctive 3sg. ∗-ēti should have remained
unchanged in Proto-Greek, ultimately yielding Att.-Ion. -ησι. In fact both end-
ings are attested indirectly in our text of Homer. Athematic -ει has of course been
replaced mechanically by -ῃ in our text (see 4.2.3 (i), 4.2.5), while -ησι is spelled
-ῃσι, but the two alternatives are not evenly distributed. As Cowgill notes, in sub-
junctives to athematic stems Homer has -ῃ (originally -ει) 272 times and -ῃσι
only thirty-five times, while in subjunctives to thematic stems the figures are 171
and 160 (Cowgill 2006b: 540). The former pair of numbers is clearly significant;
the parity of the latter pair can easily be attributed to subsequent morphological
change in the Ionic dialect (or even in the epic tradition). Cowgill discusses the
distribution of these forms in more detail (pp. 540–1), but the raw numbers speak
for themselves.
The other distributional support comes from a consideration of the pattern of
accent. As is well known, word-final -αι and -οι, though they are heavy for metrical
purposes, are normally light for the purposes of assigning accent. The commonest
exceptions are optative 3sg. -αι and -οι, and a plausible rationale for their excep-
tionality is that those endings were ∗-αιδ and ∗-οιδ (or ∗-αιτ and ∗-οιτ) before the
loss of word-final stops in fully accented words (see 3.5.3). But under Cowgill’s
hypothesis there is also another less salient exception:
pre-PGk ∗οἴκοθι ‘at home’ > οἴκοι (n.b. not ‘οἶκοι’!).
This allows us to make a generalization: word-final -αι and -οι are light for the
assignment of accent except when the ending originally included a consonant! Of
course that also accounts for the fact that 3sg. -ει, virtually the only word-final -ει
relevant to the assignment of accent, is also heavy. So far as I can see, this non-
obvious pattern is clinching: Cowgill was right to suggest that 3sg. -ει reflects ∗-eti
and -οι in two very different grammatical forms reflects ∗-otʰi.
The remaining example of this regular sound change is sui generis. PIE
apparently had an adverb ∗káti ‘in addition’ and/or an adposition ∗káti ‘with’


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 131
(Hitt. katti-). It survives in Thess. κατίγνειτος, Hom. κασίγνητος ‘brother’
(lit. co-gnātus). But it also survives in the common Greek word for ‘and’, which
is καί in most Greek dialects but κάς in Cyprian and early Arkadian. The lat-
ter form can only reflect ∗katy before vowel-initial words, but the former reflects
deaccented ∗kati under Cowgill’s hypothesis.²⁵
3.5 The origin and development of Proto-Greek ∗h
3.5.1 ∗s > ∗h
We have already seen (in 3.2.4) that PIE word-initial ∗Hy- eventually became ∗h.
A much more frequent source of ∗h was PIE ∗s.²⁶ Except when followed imme-
diately by a stop, PIE word-initial ∗s > ∗h in Greek. Straightforward examples are
numerous. There is a large family of words and compounding forms based on the
numeral ‘one’, e.g.:
PIE neut. nom.-acc. ∗sém ‘one’ (cf. Lat. semel ‘once’) > ἕν;
PIE ∗ sm ̥- ‘one’ (Skt sa-; cf. Lat. sim-plex ‘simple’, lit. ‘one-fold’) > ἁ-, e.g. in ἅπαξ
‘once’, ἁπλοος´ > ἁπλõς ‘single, simple’, lit. ‘one-fold’;
PIE ∗sēmi- ‘half-’ (Lat. sēmi-) > ἡμι-;
PIE ∗somHós ‘same’ (Skt samás) > ὁμος;´
PIE ∗ sm ̥H … ‘same’ (cf. OIr. samail ‘similar’) > ἅμα ‘at the same time’;
PIE ∗ smHó- ̥‘some’ (Goth. sums, OE sum) > ἁμο-´ in Hom. ἁμοθεν´  ‘from
somewhere’.
Note also the following typical examples:
PIE nom. sg. masc. ∗só, fem. ∗sáh₂ ‘that’ (Skt sá, sā́ , Goth. sa, so) > ὁ, ɑ ̄̔> Att.-Ion.
ἡ Hom. ‘that’, later ‘the’;
PIE ∗septmˊ ̥‘seven’ (Skt saptá, Lat. septem) > ἑπτά;
PIE ∗sédos ‘seat’ (Skt sádas, ON setr) > ἕδος;
PIE ∗sélos ‘standing water’ vel sim. (Skt sáras ‘pool’) > ἕλος ‘floodplain’;
PIE ∗sékʷetor ‘(s)he accompanies’ (Lat. sequitur) → ∗sékʷetoy (Skt sácate) >→
ἕπεται;
²⁵ As Tijmen Pronk reminds me, this PIE lexical item is often reconstructed as ∗km ̥t- (see e.g.
Melchert 1994a: 126 with references), but there is no positive evidence for such a preform; as Melchert’s
discussion makes clear, it was prompted by a desire to connect this word with others. For a quite
different hypothesis of the development of this conjunction (which does not depend on reconstruct-
ing ∗a), see Lu¨ttel (1981). As Cowgill notes, whereas West Greek ποί can reflect dissimilatory loss
before the definite article (∗ποτὶ τ … > ποὶ τ …), the distribution of καί is completely different
(Cowgill 2006b: 543).
²⁶ For extensive discussion of the origin and development of Proto-Greek ∗h from a modern
phonological point of view, see Jatteau (2016).


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
132 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗sépti ‘(s)he handles’ (Gāthā-Av. haptī ‘(s)he holds’) → ∗sép-e/o- (cf. Skt
sápati) in Hom. ptc. acc. ἕποντα ‘taking care of ’;
PIE ∗selk- ‘pull’ (Toch. B sa¨lkāte ‘(s)he pulled out’) > ἕλκɛ¯ν;
PIE pres. ∗sérp-e/o- ‘crawl’ (Lat. serpere) > ἕρπɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗sál-s ‘salt’ (Lat. sal) > ἅλς;
PIE ∗sál-ye/o- ‘jump’ (Lat. salīre) > ἅλλεσθαι;
PIE ∗sólwos ‘whole’ (Skt sárvas) > ὅλος;
PIE ∗suH- ‘rain’ (Toch. B pres. 3sg. suwaṃ; possibly ∗suh₂-, cf. Hitt. suhhai
‘(s)he shakes out’) > ῡɛ῞ ¯ν;
PIE ∗sénos ‘old’ (Skt sánas, Lith. sẽnas), fem. ∗sénah₂ > Att. ἕνη καὶ νέᾱ ‘last day
of the (lunar) month’, lit. ‘old and new (moon)’;
PIE ∗ ser- ‘to put things on a string’ (Lat. serere ‘put in order, arrange’),
action/result nouns ∗sórmos > ὅρμος ‘necklace’, ∗sérmn̥ > ∗hέρμą in Hom.
pl. ἕρματα ‘earrings’;
PIE ∗sáh₂wl̥ ~ ∗sh₂uén- ‘sun’ (Skt súar, Gāthā-Av. gen. xv¯ṇgə ), deriv. ∗sáh₂wel-
in ∗hᾱ́ ϝελιος > Hom. ἠέλιος, Att. ἥλιος;
PIE ∗seyk- ‘walk’ vel sim. (cf. Toch. B siknaṃ ‘(s)he steps’) in post-PIE pres.
∗sik-néw- ~ ∗sik-nu- ~ ∗sik-n̥ w- → ∗hικνέϝε/ο- > ἱκνέεσθαι, and ∗hικąνϝε/ο-
> Hom. ἱκά̄ νɛ¯ν, both ‘to come to, to arrive’.
For one PIE word Greek exhibits doublets, one with ∗ s- > ∗h- and one with ∗ s-
preserved unchanged:
PIE ∗súH-s or ∗ sū́ -s ‘pig’ (Lat. susˉ , ON sýr ‘sow’) > ὗς and σ ˜υς.
Since sound changes do not capriciously fail to operate on a lexical basis, we need
an explanation for σ˜υς. Conceivably it was generalized from positions after a word
in the same phrase ending in a stop or ∗s; since ∗s did not become ∗h in those posi-
tions within a word, it is conceivable that it did not do so within phrases either. But
it is difficult to see why the alternant with σ- should have been generalized only in
this word. More likely σ ˜υς was borrowed from a closely related language in which
PIE ∗s- survived (so e.g. Lejeune 1972: 92 fn. 2). Unfortunately we know virtually
nothing about other IE languages that were in contact with Greek prehistorically.
PIE ∗s also became Greek ∗h word-initially before sonorants. There seems to be
only one example with ∗sy-:
PIE ∗syuHmén- ‘(piece of ) sewing’ (cf. Skt neut. syū́ ma ‘strap’) > ʋ̄̔ μήν ‘mem-
brane’.²⁷
²⁷ The quantity of the υ is somewhat shaky. When used as the name of the marriage god the word
has a long ῡ, but the υ of the derivative ὑμέναιος is consistently short; in its literal meaning the word
seems to appear in verse only in Apollonios of Rhodes’ Argonautica 4.1648, where it has a short υ. Frisk
s.v. 2. ὑμήν suggests metrical lengthening for the instances with long ῡ, though other explanations are
possible. If Gk ‘membrane’ does have a short υ, we must hypothesize that the root’s laryngeal was lost


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 133
Evidently the ∗ y was lost at some point, though how that happened is not
recoverable; it is plausible, but not provable, that ∗ sy- and ∗Hy- both became
∗hy-, probably realized phonetically as voiceless ∗[j̥] (see 3.2.4 ad init.), which then
became ∗h-. Examples with ∗w are more numerous, and both the ∗h- and the ∗ w
survived down into the Hellenistic period in various dialects. Note the following
examples:
Nuclear IE ∗swé acc. ‘himself, herself, themselves’ (cf. Skt svayám) > ϝ̔ ε (pre-
served in Pamphylian ϝhε²⁸) > Lesb. ϝε, Att. ἑ;
PIE ∗swéḱs ‘six’ (Rothstein-Dowden 2021; Av. xšuuaš, Welsh chwech) > (∗)ϝ̔ έξ
> Att. ἕξ, Boiotian ϝέξ;
PIE ∗swéḱuros ‘father-in-law’ (Skt ´svá´suras, Lat. socer) > ∗ϝ̔ έκυρος > Att. ἑκυρος´
(accent by lexical analogy with ἑκυρα ̄́);
PIE ∗swáh₂dus ‘pleasant, sweet’ (Skt svādús) > ɑ ̄̔δύς > Att.-Ion. ἡδύς;
PIE ∗swéyd- ~ ∗swid- ‘sweat’ (Skt pres. 3sg. svidyati) > ∗ϝ ̔ιδ- in noun ἱδρ ως.´
In most dialects the ϝ was eventually lost, but in many the rough breathing
persisted through the Hellenistic period.
It should be noted that some words with initial ∗ s- or ∗sw- are attested only or
mainly in ‘psilotic’ dialects that lost the rough breathing in the prehistoric period
(see 7.2.6), especially Lesbian and East Ionic; an example is Hom. ἀοσσɛ˜ν ‘to help’,
adduced in 3.4.3. Other examples include:
PIE ∗ sn ̥tér ‘separately’ (cf. Goth. sundro, ON sundr with zero-grade suffix and
further endings) > ∗hąτέρ > Hom. ἄτερ ‘without’;
PIE ∗sér(i) ‘on top’ (Hitt. sēr ‘above’) > ∗hερι- > Hom. ἐρι- ‘very’ (Willi 1999);
PIE ∗ ser- ‘flow’ (cf. Skt pres. 3sg. sı´sarti, Lat. deriv. serum ‘whey’) in agent noun
∗sorós > ∗hορος´   > Hom., Ion. ὀρος´   ‘whey’;
PIE nom. pl. ∗swésores ‘sisters’ (Skt svásāras) > ∗hϝέhορες > ἔορες ‘(female)
relatives’ (Hesykhios).
The third word seems to be an Ionic loanword in Plato, Aristotle, and Theophras-
tos, since the rough breathing is not usually lost in Attic. An example that seems
to have lost its ∗h- in Attic in a different way is
PIE ∗ ser- ‘to put things on a string’ (Lat. serere ‘put in order, arrange’) →
pres. ∗sér-ye/o- > ∗ɛ̔̄́ ρɛ¯ν, cpd. συν-ɛ̄́ ρɛ¯ν with regular loss of ∗h-, whence
decompound Att. ɛ̔̄́ ρɛ¯ν (Frisk s.v. 1. εἴρω).
by resegmentation in some related word in which it occurred before a vowel. In any case the etymology,
with its initial ∗sy-, can be allowed to stand.
²⁸ And in Argolic ϝhεδιέστᾱς ‘private citizen’ (Buck 83.7), as Philomen Probert reminds me.


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
134 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
As we will see in 3.5.5, there are also irregularities with the breathings that are less
easy to explain.
There are also a number of examples of initial ∗ s- > ∗h- followed by coronal
sonorants, for instance:
PIE ∗snusós ‘daughter-in-law’ (Arm. now, gen. nowoy; cf. Skt snuṣā́ , OE snoru
with shift of stem class) > ∗hνυhος´   > νυος;´
PIE pres. ∗snéh₁ye/o- ‘be spinning’ (Skt snā́ yati ‘(s)he wraps’, OIr. sniïd ‘(s)he
twists’) > ∗hνηjε/ο- > νῆν;
PIE ∗snéh₁wr ̥‘sinew’ (Toch. B ṣñor, cf. Skt sna ̄́van-) >→ ∗snēwro- (cf. Lat.
nervos) > ∗hνεϝρο- > νευρον;˜
PIE ∗snah₂- ‘bathe, swim’ (Skt pres. 3sg. sna ̄́ti) > ∗hνᾱ- in να ̄́χɛ¯ν ‘to swim’ >
Att.-Ion. νήχɛ¯ν;
PIE pres. ∗snéygʷʰ-e/o- ‘to snow’ (OHG inf. snīwan, Old Lat. 3sg. nīvit) >
νείφɛ¯ν; zero-grade noun ∗snigʷʰ- ‘snow’ (Lat. nix, niv-) > Hom. acc. νίφα,
cf. also ἀγά-νɛ¯νιφος ‘very snowy’ with Aiolic treatment of intervocalic ∗-sn-;
PIE ∗sleh₁g- ‘cease’ (cf. Oscan acc. slaagı´m ‘boundary’, Joseph 1982) > ∗slēg- >
λήγɛ¯ν, cf. also Hom. (Aiolic) ἄλληκτος;
PIE zero-grade ∗slǵ- ‘let̥ go’ (Skt pres. 3sg. sr ̥játi) > ∗hlag- in Cretan aor.
λαγάσαι, DGE 179.I.5;
pre-Gk aor. ∗slagʷ-é/ó- ‘take hold of, grab’ >→ hλαβε/ο- (East Argolic ptc.
λhαβṓν) > λαβɛ¯ν;
PIE pres. ∗sréw-e/o- ‘be flowing’ (Skt 3sg. srávati) > ∗ῥέϝɛ¯ν > ῥɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗srι ̄́gos ‘cold(ness)’ (Lat. frīgus) > ῥῖγος;
PIE ∗srebʰ- ~ ∗ sr ̥bʰ- ‘slurp, suck up’ (zero grade in Lat. sorbēre, Arm. aor. arb
‘(s)he drank’), intensive ∗srobʰ-éye/o- > ῥοφɛ˜ν.
It can be seen that ∗h- survives before ρ but is eventually lost before the other
coronal sonorants in the well-attested dialects. For the most part the same devel-
opments are observable before ∗m:
PIE ∗ smey- ‘smile’ (pres. Skt 3sg. smáyate, Toch. B ptc. smimane) → ∗smey-d-
in Hom. aor. 3sg. μείδησε, cf. also φιλο-μμειδὴς Ἀφροδῑ́ τη with Aiolic
treatment of intervocalic ∗-sm-;
PIE ∗sémih₂ fem. ‘one’ → ∗smı´h₂ (Arm. mi ‘one’) > μία;
PIE ∗smer- ‘to receive a portion’ (Lat. merērī ‘to deserve’; cf. ɛ̔̄́ μαρται ‘it is fated’
< ∗hε-hμαρ- < ∗ se-smr̥ -) > μɛ̄́ ρεσθαι.
However, there are also plausibly inherited words in which ∗sm- yields σμ-:
PIE ∗smerd- ‘be painful, hurt’ (OE smeortan) in Hom. σμερδαλέος, σμερδνος´
‘terrible’;


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 135
PIE ∗smewH … ‘burn, smolder’ (OE smēocan ‘to smoke (intr.)’) in Hom.
σμʋ̄́ χοιτο ‘(as if ) it were burning’ Il. 22.411.
In addition there are doublets with σμ- ~ (∗hμ- >) μ-; the most conspicuous is
σμῑκρος´ ~ μῑκρος´ ‘little, small’ (cf. Lat. mīca ‘grain, a little’?).
The most plausible hypothesis to account for this constellation of facts is that
there was at least one dialect of Greek (not necessarily surviving to be attested) in
which the ∗s of word-initial ∗sm- did not become ∗h, and that the attested pattern
of outcomes reflects substantial borrowing between dialects at an early date.²⁹
PIE ∗ s between vowels also became ∗h, which persisted until the Mycenaean
period (see below) and was then lost. The change ∗s > ∗h clearly occurred after the
laryngeals, which were obstruents, had been lost, since the vowels to which they
gave rise (see 3.2.4) provided part of the environment for this change. As might be
expected, examples are easy to find:
PIE ∗dʰéh₁s- ~ ∗dʰh₁s- (cf. Lat. diēs fēstus ‘holiday’, ∗fasnom > fānum ‘temple’)
> ∗tʰes- in ∗θεh´ος  > θε´ος  ‘god’, cf. θέσ-φατος ‘god-spoken’;
PIE gen. ∗ǵénh₁esos ‘of a lineage’ (Skt jánasas, cf. Lat. generis with alternative
ending ∗-es) > ∗γένεhος > γένεος > Att. γένˉος, cf. nom.-acc. γένος < PIE
∗ǵénh₁os (Skt jánas, Lat. genus); so also the other forms of s-stem nominals
with overt endings (see below);
PIE ∗wīs- ~ ∗wis- ‘poison’ (Lat. vīrus vs. Skt viṣám, Toch. B wase) > ∗ϝῑh´ος >
ῑ̓ ος;´
PIE ∗snusós ‘daughter-in-law’ (Arm. now, gen. nowoy; cf. Skt snuṣā́ , OE snoru
with shift of stem class) > ∗hνυh´ος  > νυ´ος;
PIE ∗pésos ‘penis’ (Skt pásas, cf. Lat. pēnis < ∗pesnis) > ∗πέhος > πέος;
PIE subj. 1sg. ∗h₁ésoh₂ ‘I will be’ (Lat. fut. eroˉ, cf. Skt subj. ásāni) > ∗ἔhω > Ion.
ἔω;
PIE ∗h₁sónt-, fem. ∗h₁sóntih₂ ‘being’ → ∗h₁sónt-, ∗h₁sn̥ tı´h₂ (Skt sánt-, satῑ́ ) >
∗esónt-, ∗ esn̥ tı´h₂ (see 3.2.4) > ∗ἐhοντ-´ ~ ∗ἐhąτja > Ion. ἐ´οντ-, Ark. ἔασσα;
PIE ∗nésontor ‘they are returning’ (cf. Goth. ga-nisan ‘to be saved’) → ∗nésontoy
(Skt násante ‘they unite’) > ∗νέhοντοι >→ Hom. νέονται ‘they go home’;
PIE pres. ∗trés-e/o- ‘be afraid’ (Skt 3sg. trásati) > ∗τρέhε-hεν > τρɛ˜ν;
PIE nom. pl. ∗swésores ‘sisters’ (Skt svásāras) > ∗hϝέhορες > ἔορες ‘(female)
relatives’ (Hesykhios, evidently from a psilotic dialect).
²⁹ The existence of (σ)μῑκρ´ος ‘small’ is probably responsible for an unetymological detail of the shape
of μέγας ‘big’. The PIE ancestor of the latter clearly began with ∗m- (cf. Goth. mikils, Skt mahánt-, Hitt.
mekkis ‘much’, Toch. B māka ‘much’, all languages in which ∗sm- survives), but the Proto-Greek word
was apparently ∗hμεγα(λο)-, to judge from Pamphylian acc. sg. fem. μhε[ι]άλα (Brixhe 1976: 168, 172),
Megarian Mhεγαρεύς (DGE 152, V c.), and the fact that numerous Homeric examples of this adjective
and its derivatives must be scanned with long μ- (e.g. in the frequent phrase ἐνὶ μεγάροισι ‘in the
long-halls’). Lexical analogy between antonyms is the easiest way to account for this anomaly.


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====
136 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
That /h/ was still present in Mycenaean is shown by spellings such as s-stem nom.
pl. pa-we-a₂ ∗φάρϝεhα ‘bolts of cloth’, in which a₂ unambiguously spells /ha/.
Between a vowel and a syllabic nasal the regular development is likewise ∗h:
PIE∗é h₁esm̥ ‘I was’ (Skt ā́ sam, recharacterized with postvocalic -m) > ∗ḗsm̥ >
∗ἤhą > Hom. ἦα;
PIE ∗ḗsror ‘they are sitting’ → ∗ḗsn̥ toy (Skt ā́ sate) > ∗ἤhąτοι > ∗hήhąτοι (by
‘Hauchumsprung’, see 3.5.2) >→ Hom. ἥαται (spelled εἵαται in our text).
When the syllabic nasal precedes, however, the outcome does not seem to be
uniform (Schwyzer 1939: 307). There are at least two examples in which ∗ s has
become ∗h:
PIE ∗dens- ‘teach, learn’ (Av. inj. 3sg. didąs ‘(s)he taught’, Gāthā-Av. pres. 1sg.
dīdaŋ́ hē ‘I learn’) ~ ∗dn̥s- > ∗δąh- in Hom. aor. 3sg. δέδαε ‘(s)he taught’,
δαήμεναι ‘to learn’;
pre-Gk ∗ sm̥ -sokʷ-yo- ‘companion’ > ∗hąhοκjο-, denom. verb ∗hąhοκjε-jε/ο-
‘accompany’ > Hom. ἀοσσɛ¯ν ‘to help’ (psilotic).
Since the latter is a compound it might be suspected of exhibiting the word-initial
development at the beginning of its second member, but since it is completely
opaque it could exhibit the regular phonological development after a syllabic nasal
if it had been constructed early enough. Unfortunately there is also at least one
example in which ∗s apparently survives unchanged:
PIE ∗dénsus ~ ∗dn̥ séw- ‘dense’ (Hitt. dassus ‘powerful’; Lat. dēnsus has been
shifted into the o-stems) → ∗dn̥ sús > δασύς ‘thickly overgrown, shaggy’.
On the other hand, Att. δαυλ´ος ‘tangled’ vel sim. (Aiskhylos Suppliants 93) could
be a derivative of the same adjective, reflecting ∗δąhυλ´ος with ∗h < ∗s. (Much less
certain is Hom. ἄσις ‘mud’, which might or might not be connected with Skt ásitas
‘dark-colored’, reflecting a preform ∗ n̥ si-.) It is difficult to give a principled account
of this double outcome. Hoenigswald (1953) shows that one can be constructed
if we accept two hypotheses: first, that the double outcome of syllabic liquids, e.g.
both ρα and αρ < ∗ r̥ (see 5.4.1), reflects a dual pronunciation of all non-vocalic
syllabic sonorants at an early date, perhaps even in PIE; and second, that the alter-
nation between the two pronunciations was governed by something very similar
to Sievers’ Law. In that case the syllabic half of the syllabic nasal, so to speak,
would be the first half after a heavy syllable in pre-Greek ∗ḗsm̥ and ∗ḗsn̥ toy, so
that the ∗s would effectively be intervocalic and would become ∗h; in the preform
of δέδαε the syllable preceding the syllabic nasal was light, the syllabic part of the
nasal would be at its end, and the ∗s would again be intervocalic and become ∗h.


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 137
In word-initial syllables one would expect the position of syllabicity within the
syllabic sonorant to depend on the shape of the preceding word, leading to dou-
blets like Hom. κρατερ´ος  vs. καρτερ´ος,  Hom. κραδίη vs. Att. καρδίᾱ—and that is
apparently what we find in δαυλ´ος, with ∗s effectively between vowels, vs. δασύς,
with ∗s effectively following a consonant. We can even account for ἄσις with the
suggestion that in word-initial position the syllabic portion of the sonorant came
first.³⁰ As Hoenigswald emphasizes, ‘All this is offered with the utmost caution’
(Hoenigswald 1953: 291); there is no corroboration of these hypotheses from any
other IE language, and in fact sequences ∗[ən] and ∗[nə] (or the like) must have
passed through a fully syllabic stage ∗[nˌ ] to develop into ∗ą, as they clearly had by
the Mycenaean period. But no other explanation of the dual outcome of ∗s in this
position seems workable.
The situation is roughly similar for ∗ s adjacent to syllabic ∗ r̥ . When the latter
follows, ∗s > ∗h, as expected:
(post-)PIE ∗isu-ǵʰesr- ‘with arrows in hand’ (cf. Skt ´ṣuhastası with second
element remodeled) >→ fem. ∗iswo-kʰesr̥ -ya > ∗ἰhϝο-χεhαρ-jα > Hom.
( Ἄρτεμις) ῑ̓οχέαιρα (Heubeck 1956).
When ∗ r̥ precedes, there is no evidence that ∗ s underwent any change when a
syllabic followed, but there are only two examples:
PIE ∗dʰérsus ~ ∗dʰr̥ séw- ‘daring, bold’ (cf. Skt pf. dadʰárṣa, Goth. ga-dars ‘(s)he
dares’) → ∗dʰr̥ sús > Hom. θρασύς with derivs. θαρσῡ́ νɛ¯ν ‘to be bold, to dare’,
etc.;
post-PIE or substrate ∗ pr̥ˊsom ‘leek’ (Lat. porrum) > πράσον (Frisk s.v.).
The σ of the former can have been leveled in from inherited θέρσος ‘boldness’
(preserved in Lesbian, cf. Alkaios 206.2; elsewhere → θάρσος by leveling on the
adjective), with regularly surviving σ (see below), while it is not certain when the
latter entered the language. However, ∗ s did become ∗h between ∗ r̥ and a non-
syllabic sonorant:
PIE ∗tres- ‘be afraid’ (pres. τρɛ˜ν, Skt 3sg. trásati), zero-grade ∗tr̥ s- in adj. ∗tr̥ s-ró-
‘afraid’ > ∗trahro- in ∗τράhρων ‘timid’ (Hom. τρήρων; see further below).
That suggests that the failure of ∗ s to undergo the change in the preceding two
examples resulted from the special circumstances noted above. I can find no
examples of inherited ∗l̥s (nor of non-initial ∗sl̥).
³⁰ Hoenigswald proposes (p. 291) that the development of word-initial ∗ r ̥to αρ suggests as much,
but it has since become clear that all the relevant examples are or could be laryngeal-initial.


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====
138 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
When ∗ s occurred between ∗ y and a vowel (in that order) the outcome must
at first have been ∗jh, which seems to have developed straightforwardly into [jj],
written in attested Greek as the second half of an ι-diphthοng in hiatus. I can find
only one clear example:
PIE ∗tweys- ‘shake’ (cf. Skt atviṣanta ‘they have been inflamed’ RV VIII.94.7
with zero-grade root) in pres. ∗twéys-e/o- > ∗ʦϝέιhε/ο- > σείɛ¯ν.
When ∗ s occurred between a vowel and ∗y (in that order) we observe a double
outcome of the cluster ∗ sy. When a morpheme boundary intervened the result
was ∗hy > [jj], written as the second half of an ι-diphthοng. Examples are fairly
numerous, though most are (or could be) innovative Greek formations:
PIE opt. 3sg. ∗h₁siéh₁t ‘let him be’ (Skt syā́ t; cf. Old Lat. siet) >→ ∗esyēd (see
3.2.4; unaccented main-clause form, see 2.2.5) > ∗ἐhjη (see 3.5.3) > εἴη;
(post-)PIE ∗widúsih₂ fem. ‘knowing’ (Skt vidúṣī) > ∗ϝιδύhjα (see 3.2.2) > Hom.
ἰδυῖα;
PIE ∗ mus- ‘fly’ (cf. Lat. musca) in pre-Gk ∗músya > ∗μύhjα > μυῖα;
PIE ∗kónis ~ ∗kénis- ‘dust, ashes’ (cf. Lat. cinis ‘ashes’) in pre-Gk ∗konis-yé/ó-
‘make dusty’ > ∗κονιhjε/ο- > Hom. κονῑ́ɛ¯ν (ῑ = ιι̯);
pre-Gk pres. ∗nas-ye/o- ‘be dwelling, inhabit’ (cf. Att. νε ως´ ‘temple’ (i.e. ‘house
(of the god)’) < νη´ος < νᾱϝ´ ος  < ∗ναhϝ´ος <  ∗nas-wó-) > Hom. ναίɛ¯ν;
pre-Gk ∗aydós-yo- ‘respected; respectful’ (cf. αἰδως´ ‘respect’) > ∗αἰδ´οh-jο-ς >
αἰδοῖος.
When there was no morpheme boundary between ∗h and ∗j the outcome in most
dialects was apparently ∗h, which of course was eventually lost because it was
intervocalic. The only examples are gen. sg. forms in ∗-syo:
PIE ∗tósyo ‘of that’ (Skt tásya, OE þæs) > ∗τ´οhο  > ∗τ´οο  > τõ; so also the gen.
sg. of o- stem adjectives and nouns;
PIE ∗kʷésyo ‘whose?’ (Gāthā-Av. cahiiā, Goth. ƕis) > ∗ʧʷέhο > Hom. τέο.
However, in Homer the thematic endings are in competition with τοῖο, -οιο; Pelas-
giote Thessalian -οι < ∗-οιο exhibits the same development, and Myc. -o-jo prob-
ably does. It is conceivable that in a few dialects ∗sy with no internal morpheme
boundary developed like ∗s+y, but it is also possible that ∗-osyo was reinterpreted
as (nom. sg.) ∗-os+yo in those dialects—whence the usual development with an
internal morpheme boundary (Nussbaum 1985).
There is also a chronological problem to be addressed. We should expect the
development of ∗sy with no internal morpheme boundary to be the regular sound
change development, since those examples are morphologically isolated, whereas


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 139
those with an internal morpheme boundary should be more vulnerable to mor-
phologically motivated changes simply because they are morphologically complex.
Therefore, in the (probable) chain of changes ∗ sy > ∗hj > ∗h, either the mor-
phologically complex examples must have become ∗h by regular sound change
and then been restored to ∗hj (or the like) by leveling, or else they must have
somehow been inhibited from undergoing the final change to ∗h; or, during the
period when the change ∗hj > ∗h was in progress, native learners must have
sorted the examples out in such a way that the morphologically complex exam-
ples retained the more conservative alternative ∗hj while the isolated examples
underwent the change. Of the three alternatives, outright inhibition of a regu-
lar change is by far the least likely; alleged examples are all highly doubtful. We
are left with the choice between the first and third. Probable cases of the third
alternative are known; the most striking is the loss of inflectional -n in early Mid-
dle English (Moore 1927; cf. Kiparsky 1982: 91–3). But it seems clear that such
changes are comparatively rare, probably because they can occur only when a
sound change takes several generations to go to completion, giving native learn-
ers ample time to manipulate the old and new alternatives in competition. On
the other hand, the first alternative—a straightforward sound change followed
by a clearly distinct episode of leveling—is almost as unattractive as the second;
it strains credulity to suggest that a comparatively isolated word like ∗μύhα ‘fly’
(assuming that such a form ever existed) was remodeled to ∗μύhjα, undoing the
sound change ∗hj > ∗h, just because all other nouns in short ∗-ᾰ exhibited ∗j before
the stem vowel. I conclude, with due caution, that the distribution of the outcomes
of ∗hj is the result of morphological influence on a sound change still in progress,
of the sort that Kiparsky argues we must posit for the phenomenon discovered
by Moore.
∗ s also became ∗h word-internally between a vowel and other sonorants and
between those sonorants and a vowel, with one notable class of exceptions (to be
discussed below). In these instances the subsequent development of the ∗h-cluster
was complex; I will deal with those details in 5.2.2. Here I simply list rele-
vant inherited examples with their eventual outcomes in some alphabetic Greek
dialects.
PIE ∗h₁esmi ‘I am’ (Skt asmi, unaccented main-clause form) > ∗esmi (see 3.2.1)
> ∗ἐhμι (Hom., Att., etc. ɛ̄̓ μι, Lesb. ἐμμι);
PIE ∗wésmn̥ ‘garment’ (Skt vásma) > ∗ϝέhμą (Hom., Att. εμα);῟
PIE ∗ n̥ smé ‘us’ (Skt asmā́ n with added acc. pl. ending) > ∗ąhμέ (Dor. ɑ̄̔ μέ, Ion.
ἡμέας);
PIE ∗ḗsh₂ar ‘I’m sitting’ (Hitt. ēshari) → ∗ḗsh₂ay (Skt ā́ se) >→ ∗ἤhμαι (Hom.
ἧμαι);
post-PIE ∗ wes-nu- ‘dress, clothe’ (Arm. z-genow ‘(s)he wears’) > ∗ϝεhνυ- (Hom.
καταείνυσαν ‘they covered’, Il. 23.135, ει = ɛ¯);


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====
140 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗h₁régʷes- ‘darkness’ (Goth. riqis; Skt rájas-‘empty space’) in ∗ἐρεγʷεh-νο-´
‘dark’ (Hom. (Aiolic) ἐρεβεννος);´
(post-)PIE ∗ǵʰéslom ‘thousand’(Skt sa-hásram), deriv. ∗ǵʰéslio- > ∗χέhλιο-
(Ion. gen. pl. χειλίων (ει = ɛ¯) DGE 688.D.12, Thessalian acc. pl. fem. χέλλιας
DGE 614.29);
PIE ∗ǵʰésr-³¹ ‘hand’ (Hitt. kissar, Toch. B ṣar, Arm jeṙn) > ∗χεhρ- (Hom., Att.,
etc. χɛ ̄́ρ);
PIE ∗tres- ‘be afraid’ (pres. τρɛ˜ν, Skt 3sg. trásati), zero-grade ∗tr ̥s- in adj. ∗tr ̥s-ró-
‘afraid’ > ∗trahro- in ∗τράhρων ‘timid’ (Hom. τρήρων);
PIE ∗´ıs us ‘arrow’ (Skt ´ıṣus ) → ∗iswós > ∗ἰhϝος´   (Hom. ι ̄̓ος);´
PIE ∗ṓmsos³² ‘shoulder’ (Toch. B āntse) > ∗ὤμhος (Hom., Att. ὦμος);
PIE ∗ǵʰáns- ‘goose’ (Skt haṃsás ‘swan’, OHG gans) > ∗χάνh- (Hom., Att. χήν);
PIE ∗méh₁n ̥s- ‘moon’ (Skt mā́ s, Lat. mēnsis ‘month’) > ∗mēns- > ∗μηνh- ‘month’
(Att. μήν);
PIE ∗(h₂)áns- ‘handle’ (Lat. ānsa), deriv. ∗(h₂)ansio- ‘reins’ (Middle Irish pl.
éisi) > ∗ἀνhιο- (pl. Hom. ἡνία, Att. ἡνίαι);
PIE ∗h áwsos₂ˉ ‘dawn’ → ∗h usṓs₂ (Skt uṣá̄  s) > ∗ἀϝh ως´   (Hom. ἠως,´   Att. ἕως);
PIE ∗h₂áwsos ‘ear’ (OCS uxo) >→ ∗ὄϝhος (by lexical analogy with ∗okʷ- ‘eye’;
Hom., Att. ος).῏
The exceptions to this development involve the clusters ∗ rs and ∗ls (see espe-
cially Wackernagel 1888, Miller 1976, the latter with comprehensive references).
It is clear that when the immediately preceding syllabic was accented, ∗s in those
clusters underwent no change:³³
PIE ∗órsos ‘arse’ (Hitt. ārras, OE ears) > (∗)ὄρσος (in Ion. ὀρσοπυ ̄́γιον ‘part of
the rump where the tailfeathers are attached’) > Att. ὄρρος;
PIE ∗dʰérsos ‘daring, bravery’ (cf. Skt dadʰárṣa, Goth. ga-dars ‘(s)he dares’) >
Lesbian θέρσος (→ Hom. θάρσος by leveling from the related adj.);
PIE ∗h₁wers- ‘rain, fall (as dew)’ (Skt várṣati ‘it’s raining’) > Hom. ἐέρση ‘dew’;
PIE ∗ters- ‘dry out’ (cf. Skt pres. 3sg. trˊṣyati̥) > Hom. τέρσεσθαι;
PIE ∗kʷels- ‘make a groove’ (Hitt. gulszi ‘(s)he engraves’) > Hom. τέλσον
(ἀρούρης) ‘boundary (of the field)’.
³¹ In this word and in ‘goose’ and ‘moon’ below the consonant cluster that occurred before vowel-
initial endings has been leveled into the nom. sg.
³² Gothic acc. pl. amsans could reflect the same preform, but Skt áṃsas must reflect a preform with a
short vowel in the root, since Osthoff ’s Law did not operate in Skt (cf. māṃsám ‘meat’); like the Gothic
word, Arm. ows is ambiguous, while Lat. umerus must reflect yet a third preform. How to reconcile
these discrepancies is not immediately obvious, but it is at least clear that the Greek word exhibited
intervocalic ∗ms, and that the Toch. B word is exactly cognate with it. Schulze (1936) suggests plausibly
that the form with the long vowel is a vr ̥ddhi-formation originally meaning ‘shoulder-joint’, but that
does not account for the medial vowel of Lat. umerus.
³³ The additional hypotheses of Forbes (1958a) seem to me unnecessary, especially in view of the
fact that Greek verb forms with recessive accent must reflect PIE accentless forms (see 4.2.8).


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 141
Yet there are numerous examples of reconstructable PGk ∗rh and ∗lh that must
reflect earlier ∗rs and ∗ls, above all in the s-aorist (see 4.2.2 (iii)). The conditions
under which ∗s became ∗h in these clusters are elucidated by an old collective with
shifted accent formed to PIE ∗órsos ‘arse’ (see above):
(post-)PIE ∗orsáh₂ ‘backside’ > ∗ὀρhά̄ ‘rear; tail’ (Hom. o̓̄ ρή, Att. o̓̄ ρά̄ ).
The clear contrast both in accent and in the outcome of ∗ s in this pair of forms
establishes that ∗s > ∗h immediately following ∗r if the preceding syllabic was not
accented (cf. Schwyzer 1939: 285–6). A further probable example that points in
the same direction is an old causative made to the PIE root ∗h₁wers- ‘rain, fall
(as dew)’ (see above):
PIE ∗wors-éye/o- ‘make it rain’ (Skt 3sg. varṣáyati; initial laryngeal lost because
separated from ∗ o by a sonorant within the same syllable, see 2.2.4 (i)) >
∗ϝορhέjε/ο- ‘urinate’ (Att. ō̓ ρɛ˜ν).
It is reasonable to posit the same development for ∗ls. Further examples, some less
certain, are adduced by Schwyzer, loc. cit. and especially Miller (1976).
3.5.2 ∗h-copying (‘Hauchumsprung’)
If a word began with a vowel or ∗w and exhibited an ∗h between the first and sec-
ond syllabics, either intervocalic or as part of a cluster including a sonorant, the ∗h
was copied into the onset of the initial syllable (though see further below on inter-
vocalic examples).³⁴ That the ∗h was copied, not simply moved (by metathesis, as
the traditional name Hauchumsprung implies), is demonstrated by the subsequent
development of the sonorant clusters, in which the ∗h was clearly still present.
Clear examples include:
PIE ∗(h₂)áns- ‘handle’ (Lat. ānsa), deriv. ∗(h₂)ansio- ‘reins’ > ∗ἀνhιο- >
∗hανhιο- (pl. Hom. ἡνία, Att. ἡνίαι);
PIE ∗h₂áwsosˉ ‘dawn’ → ∗h₂usṓs (Skt uṣá  ̄s) > ∗ἀϝh ως´  > ∗hαϝh ως´ (Hom. ἠως,´  Att.
ἕως);
PIE ∗ n̥ smé ‘us’ (Skt asmā́ n with added acc. pl. ending) > ∗ąhμέ > ∗hąhμέ (Dor.
ɑ̄̔ μέ, Ion. ἡμέας);
PIE ∗ḗsh₂ar ‘I’m sitting’ (Hitt. ēshari) → ∗ḗsh₂ay (Skt ā́ se) >→ ∗ἤhμαι > ∗hήhμαι
(Hom. ἧμαι);
³⁴ I am grateful to Oliver Sayeed for helpful discussion of this section and for alerting me to several
problematic examples. Readers should not assume that he agrees either with my specific judgments or
with my conclusions.


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====
142 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗ḗsror ‘they are sitting’ → ∗ḗsn̥ toy (Skt ā́ sate) > ∗ἤhąτοι > ∗hήhąτοι (Hom.
ἥαται, spelled εἵαται in our text);
PIE ∗éws-e/o- pres. ‘be burning (trans.)’ (Skt 3sg. óṣati) > ∗ἔϝh-ε/ο- >
∗hέϝh-ε/ο- ‘singe, burn off (bristles)’ (Hom. εὕɛ¯ν, Att. ἀφ-εύɛ¯ν);
PIE ∗wésmn̥ ‘garment’ (Skt vásma) > ∗ϝέhμą > ∗hϝέhμą (Hom., Att. ῟εμα).
The rough breathing of augmented forms such as ipf. ɛ̔̄́ πετο ‘(s)he accompanied’,
plup. ɛ̄̔ στήκɛ̄́ ‘(s)he was standing’ could have arisen by this sound change: the
attested forms exhibit /he:-/ plausibly < ∗hee- < ∗hehe- < ∗e-he-.
Recognition of this sound change also allows us to suggest a scenario for at least
one non-obvious example:
pre-Gk ∗ár-smn̥ ‘fitting, thing fit together’ (cf. Hom. aor. ἀραρɛ˜ν ‘to fit’, fos-
silized ptc. ἄρμενος ‘fitting, suitable’, substantivized neut. pl. ἄρμενα ‘gear’
Alkaios 383.2) > ∗ἄρhμą > ∗hάρhμą (Hom., Att. ἅρμα ‘chariot’).
Were it not for the initial /h-/, a preform ∗ár-mn̥ would be reconstructed; but
since suffixes beginning with nasal consonants (except participial ∗-meno-) have
byforms with ∗-s-, the preform given above is plausible and solves the problem—
though see also the end of this section.
A surprising number of words that might be expected to reflect this sound
change do not do so, but for many there are plausible explanations. Homeric exam-
ples simply reflect the fact that the text of Homer was originally psilotic; as has long
been known, rough breathings in Homer reflect partial Atticization of the text,
so that (for example) the contracted form ἥλιος ‘sun’ (/h-/ < ∗ s-, see 3.5.1) has
the rough breathing because it coincides with the Attic form, while uncontracted
ἠέλιος has the smooth breathing because it is foreign to Attic. (The classic discus-
sion is Wackernagel 1916: 40–52; see also (more briefly) Chantraine 1973: 184–8.)
That accounts not only for ἠως,´  but also for ( Ἄρτεμις) ῑ̓ οχέαιρα (< ∗ihwo-), ἀϋτμή
‘breath’ (if it is related to OE sēoþan ‘to boil’, plausibly < ∗h₂sewt-), and plausibly
for poetic words attested elsewhere, e.g. ἔαρ ‘blood’ (cf. Hitt. ēshar), and words
attested only in Hesykhios, e.g. ἤμορος ‘without a share’ (∗ n̥ˊ-smoro-)  and ἠϊκαν´ος
‘rooster’ (plausibly ‘dawn-singer’). No dialect exhibits a rough breathing in forms
of ‘be’, but that is easily explained by leveling from the pres. indic. 3sg. ἐστι, the
‘pivotal’ form of the paradigm, which should never have had a rough breathing.
(In the presents ‘be sitting’ and ‘wear’ leveling worked in the opposite direction.)
Surprisingly, many of the remaining exceptions exhibit o-vowels in the initial
syllable: ὦμος ‘shoulder’, o˜̓ ς ‘ear’ (which of course could owe its smooth breathing
to ‘eye’, to which it owes its vowel), ō̓ ρᾱ́ ‘tail’, ō̓ ρɛ˜ν ‘urinate’ (and ō̓ ρανος´ ‘sky’, if
derived from ∗ worso- ‘rain’), ὦνος ‘price’ (< ∗wṓsnos) with its derivatives. In fact


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 143
there are no certain examples of h-copying across an o-vowel;³⁵ that seems like an
improbable condition on such a change, but the pattern is regular.
However, there are other counterexamples to h-copying which are less easy to
explain. Given that ῑ̓ ος ´  ‘poison, rust’ < ∗ϝῑh´ος  occurs almost exclusively in poetry,
we might suggest that its occasional appearance in Attic prose (e.g. Plato Timaeus
59c) reflects borrowing of a poetic—ultimately a Homeric—word; and it is at least
conceivable that αὔριον ‘tomorrow’, reflecting ∗h₂awsr-, a derivative of ‘dawn’ (cf.
Lith. aušrà) has lost its rough breathing by lexical analogy with ἆμαρ ‘day’. But
such an explanation is not plausible for at least two words:
∗h₁ésu- ‘good’ (Hitt. assus), compounding form ∗h₁su- (Skt su-) > Hom. ἐΰς,
pan-Greek εὐ-;
∗wésr̥ ‘spring(time)’ (cf. Av. loc. vaŋri, Lith. vasarà ‘summer’) > ἔαρ.
Neither of these words has a rough breathing attested in any dialect. Since most
examples of h-copying involve word-internal ∗h next to a sonorant, we might sug-
gest that copying was triggered only by ∗h-clusters, and that these two words fail
to exhibit copying because their ∗h’s were intervocalic; in that case the initial /h/ of
ɛ̔̄́ πετο, etc., must be the result of morphological change rather than regular sound
change, and the initial /h/ of ἥαται is the result of leveling (from a rather small
basis, namely those forms in which μ immediately followed the root).
On the other hand, any attempt to explain the initial /h/’s in the first list of
this section by leveling or lexical analogy runs into even greater difficulties; ἡνία
‘reins’ and εὕν ‘to singe’ are especially difficult to explain because of their isolation.
I conclude, with caution, that h-copying was a regular sound change—probably
failing to occur over o-vowels, possibly not triggered by intervocalic ∗h—whose
outcomes might have been disturbed by subsequent changes not all of which can
be recovered.
The fact that ∗h is copied into an onset including ∗w-, but not into an onset
including ∗y-, is striking; it probably indicates that initial ∗ y- was no longer a
semivowel at the time when this change occurred. The clear examples are ζɛ˜ν ‘to
boil’ < ∗ʤέh-ε/ο- (or the like) < ∗yés-e/o- (cf. OHG jesan ‘to ferment’), the word-
family of ζ ωνη´  ‘belt’ < ∗ʤ ´ωhνᾱ  (cf. Av. yåŋhaiia-‘gird’), and probably ζυμη ̄́ ‘yeast’
< ∗ʤῡ́ hμᾱ (cf. Lat. iusˉ ‘broth’).
³⁵ From the fact that a byform οἷμος of οἶμος ‘way, course, (Hom.) stripe’ is attested, and from the
occurrence of φροίμιον ‘prelude’ in tragedy (beside προοίμιον elsewhere), it has been conjectured that
οἶμος and Hom. οἴμη ‘song’ reflect pre-Gk ∗óy-smo- ‘(act of ) going’ (see Frisk s.vv.). In that case the
smooth breathings must reflect psilosis, and the puzzling restriction on h-copying did not apply to the
syllable nucleus οι (of which the o might have been somewhat fronted; note that in Homer ∗ϝ exhibits
its usual metrical effects before οι, but not before other o-vowels). But the given etymologies of these
words do not strike me as overwhelmingly convincing.


===== PDF PAGE 154 =====
144 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
H-copying must have occurred after the change of ∗ s to ∗h but before the
sound changes that altered ∗hR- and ∗Rh-clusters (see 5.2.2). When the latter
changes occurred is difficult to say. If the hypothesis of Parker (2008) is correct,
all such clusters at first became ∗RR-clusters in all Greek dialects; the first com-
pensatory lengthening was a subsequent change. If Mycenaean a-ke-ra₂-te spells
∗ἀγέρραντες (Heubeck 1979: 245–54, Aura Jorro 1999 s.v.), h-copying must have
occurred earlier. In that case the fact that Mycenaean a-mo ‘wheel’, probably the
same word as ἅρμα ‘chariot’, is never spelled with a₂-/ha-/ (Colvin 2007: 11)
requires an explanation. Several are available: possibly in some Greek dialects the
suffix did not originally contain ∗-s-; possibly the rough breathing of ἅρμα should
be attributed to some other change, such as lexical analogy; possibly the Myce-
naean noun lost its ∗h- by lexical analogy with ἀρ- ‘fit’; it is even possible that ∗ s
developed differently between two non-syllabic sonorants in some dialects. That
h-copying as a whole was a later change, as Colvin suggests loc. cit., seems less likely.
3.5.3 Osthoff ’s Law; loss of word-final stops
Osthoff ’s Law (OL) is a cover term for sound changes that shortened long vowels
when they were followed by a sonorant which was in turn followed by another
consonant (but not before word-final sonorants, which were presumably extra-
metrical). Such sound changes can be shown to have occurred in Latin, Celtic,
and Germanic, for example (but no such sound change occurred in Indo-Iranian
or Tocharian). The Greek version of OL did not operate before sonorant plus ∗h,
nor before the cluster μν; otherwise its operation seems to have been general. How-
ever, probative examples are surprisingly few (cf. Schwyzer 1939: 279–80). 3pl.
forms like Hom. βάν ‘they went’ reflect 3pl. ∗-énd colored by the laryngeal which
preceded it and was then lost; corresponding participles such as (masc. nom. pl.)
βάντες typically owe the stem vowels in their direct cases to leveling (note that
∗ gʷh₂-ónt-es would have given ‘βοντες’´ by regular sound change), while oblique
βαντ-, for instance, could reflect ∗ gʷh₂-n ̥t- by Rix’s Law (see 3.2.2). Since aorist
passive -η- does not ablaut, it might be suggested that 3pl. forms such as Hom.
μίγεν ‘they mingled’ and corresponding participles like μιγέντες are reliable exam-
ples of OL; but the aorist passive suffix probably reflects PIE stative/fientive ∗-éh₁-
(see 2.3.3 (i) and 4.2.2 (iv)), and we cannot be certain that ∗-éh₁n C- would not
have developed into ∗-énC- directly upon loss of the laryngeal. The same problem
might recur in masc. nom. pl. πάντες ‘all’; the Tocharian B cognate poñc reflects
∗ pa ̄́ntes (Ringe 1996: 97), but in Tocharian ∗-VHn ̥- apparently yields ∗-V¯ n- (cf. TB
yente, TA want ‘wind’ < ∗ wʸēntos < ∗h₂wéh₁n ̥tos > Skt vā́ tas, 3syll. in the Rigveda),
so a preform ∗páh₂n ̥tes is not excluded. The difference in vowel length between
Hom. πτέρνη ‘heel’ and Skt pa ̄́rṣṇis could reflect acrostatic ablaut; alternatively,
the Sanskrit form could be a vr ̥ddhi-derivative (so Frisk s.v. πτέρνη). But when all


===== PDF PAGE 155 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 145
the examples that can be explained in other ways have been excluded, at least the
following remain:
PIE inst. pl. ∗ -ˉoys (Skt -ais) > -οις;
PIE ∗mḗh₁n̥ s ‘moon, month’, obl. ∗méh₁n̥ s- (Skt mā́ s, OIr. mı´, mı´s-‘month’, Lat.
mēnsis ‘month’) >→ ∗mēns- ‘month’, e.g. in gen. sg. ∗mēnsós > ∗mēnhós >
Lesb. μῆννος, Att.-Ion. μην´ος; nom. sg. ∗mḗns (which might reflect the PIE
form directly) > ∗μένς > Hom. μείς, i.e. μɛ̄́ ς;
PIE ∗snéh₁wr̥ ‘sinew’ (Av. snāuuarə, Toch. B ṣñor) > ∗snḗwr̥ ; thematized
∗snḗwrom (possibly backformed to the nom.-acc. pl.) > νε˜υρον (cf. Lat.
nervos with metathesis);
PIE displaced iptv. ∗-tˉod  → 3sg. iptv.; reanalysis ∗/-t-ˉo-t/  with ‘reduplicated’ 3sg.
ending leads to the creation of 3pl. ∗-ntˉond (Ringe 1997: 138–40; see 4.2.6,
7.3.1), which > ∗-ntond > Lesb. -ντον;
post-PIE ∗ ā́ mr ̥ ‘day’ (cf. Arm. awr < coll. ∗ amˉ ̄́or)  in ∗μεσ-ᾱμρ-ίᾱ ‘midday, south’
> Ion. μεσαμβρίη (short α, since it was not fronted); in this case OL must
have preceded the fronting reflected in Hom. ἦμαρ;
Gk nom. sg. ∗γʷασιλήϝς ‘sub-king’ vel sim. (loanword, see 4.3.3) > βασιλεύς.
Two examples are possible but less certain:
PIE nom. sg. ∗dyḗws ‘sky, day’ (?; Skt dyáus) > Ζεύς;
PIE nom. sg. ∗ gʷṓws ‘bovine’ (?; Skt gáus) > βο˜υς.
The problem is that only Indo-Iranian clearly exhibits long diphthongs in the nom.
sg. of these words, and it is at least possible that the long vowel was introduced
from acc. sg. ∗dyḗm, ∗ gʷṓm only in that daughter (see, e.g., Szemerényi 1996:
181–2, Meier-Bru¨gger 2010: 211–12, Fortson 2010: 116; for comprehensive dis-
cussion, see Wodtko et al. 2008 s.vv. ∗deı̯-, ∗ gu̯óu̯ -). That ∗Rh did not trigger OL is
demonstrated not only by the oblique forms of ‘month’, but also by ὦμος ‘shoul-
der’ (see 3.5.1); that OL was not triggered by μν is shown by a range of examples
such as πλήμνη ‘hub’ and κρημνος´ ‘steep bank, cliff ’. OL followed the loss of laryn-
geals (see 3.2.1) and preceded the loss of word-final stops (see immediately below).
Later levelings and contractions produced numerous new long vowels before RC-
sequences which were not shortened; evidently OL did not remain a phonological
rule of Greek.
That inherited word-final ∗-d and ∗-t were lost in Greek is immediately obvious
from comparison of relevant words with cognates:
PIE ∗tód neut. ‘that’ (Skt tát, OE þæt) > το;´
PIE ∗ályod neut. ‘other’ (Lydian aλad, Lat. aliud) > ἄλλο;
PIE ∗kʷ´dı ‘what?’ (Hitt. kuit, Lat. quid) > τί;


===== PDF PAGE 156 =====
146 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗mélid ‘honey’ (Hitt. milit) > μέλι;
PIE ∗bʰéroyd ‘(s)he might carry’ (Skt bʰáret) > φέροι;
PIE ∗bʰéretˉod ‘one must carry’ (Skt bʰáratāt) > φερέτω ‘let him/her carry’;
PIE ∗é bʰered ‘(s)he was (reportedly) carrying’ (Skt (narrative) ábʰarat) >
ἔφερε ‘(s)he was carrying’;
PIE ∗é bʰerond ‘they were (reportedly) carrying’ (cf. Faliscan fifiqo[n]d ‘they
made’) > ἔφερον ‘they were carrying’;
PIE ∗é stah₂t ‘(s)he (reportedly) stood up’ (Skt ástʰāt) > ἔστᾱ ‘(s)he stood up’
> Att.-Ion. ἔστη;
PIE ∗é h₁est ‘(s)he (reportedly) was’ (Vedic Skt ā́ s) > ἦς ‘(s)he was’.
All Greek dialects exhibit the outcome of this change. It definitely followed
Osthoff ’s Law, since the third-person imperative vowel was shortened before ∗-nd
(see above). It might not have been a very early change, since reflexes of ∗-d survive
in fixed constructions. An obvious case is Lesbian ὄττι ‘whatever’ (e.g. in Sappho
1.15); the ὅτι of most other dialects can have been re-formed after the loss. How-
ever, it probably occurred before the creation of the new 3pl. ending -αν in the
sigmatic aorist (see 4.2.6 (i)), since an ending ∗-αδ or ∗-ατ would have been clearly
marked.
Other stops and clusters of stops were also lost word-finally, though examples
are rare. At least one was inherited:
PIE ∗é h₂aǵt ‘(s)he (reportedly) said’ (LIV s.v. 2. h₂eg̑ ; cf. pres. 3sg. Arm. asȇ,
Lat. ait) > Att.-Ion. ἦ ‘(s)he said’.
Two examples involve loanwords from unknown sources:
γάλα ‘milk’ < ∗γάλακτ, gen. γάλακτος (cf. Lat. lac, lactis);
voc. sg. ἄνα ‘lord!’ < ∗ϝάνακτ, cf. gen. ἄνακτος.
3.5.4 Grassmann’s Law
Grassmann’s Law (GL) is a cover term for regressive aspirate dissimilation; such
a sound change occurred (independently) in Greek, Indic, and Tocharian (Win-
ter 1962: 24–5, Schindler 1977a: 6). In Greek, GL occurred after the devoicing of
aspirates and the change of word-initial ∗s- to ∗h-. The aspirates were deaspirated
and ∗h- was lost if an aspirated stop followed anywhere in the word. (However,
word-internal ∗h did not trigger GL; see the end of this section for a discussion of
that peculiarity.) The following completely isolated examples establish this sound
change for Greek:
PIE ∗bʰāǵʰu- ‘arm’ (Toch. B obl. pokai, Skt bāhús) > ∗φᾱ́ χυς > πᾶχυς ‘forearm’
> Att.- Ion. πῆχυς;


===== PDF PAGE 157 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 147
PIE ∗bʰendʰ- ‘tie’ (Goth. bindan, Skt bandʰ-) > ∗φενθ- > πενθ- in πενθερος´
‘father-in- law’ (cf. Skt bándʰus ‘kinsman’);
PIE ∗bʰudʰ- ‘bottom’ (Skt budʰnás) > ∗φυθ- > πυθ- in πυθμήν ‘bottom of a jar’;
PIE ∗ gʷʰedʰ- ‘ask for’ (Goth. bidjan, Av. 3sg. jaδiieiti), derived noun ∗ gʷʰódʰos
> ∗χʷοθος´  > π´οθος  ‘desire’ (see also 5.4.1 (i));
PIE ∗dʰeyǵʰ- ‘make (out of clay)’ (Skt 1sg. déhmi, Goth. ptc. dat. sg. digandin)
in result nouns (masc.) ∗dʰóyǵʰos, (neut.) ∗dʰéyǵʰos > ∗θοῖχος, ∗θεῖχος >
τοῖχος, τεῖχος, both ‘wall’ (cf. Skt dehῑ́ ‘rampart’);
PIE ∗dʰegʷʰ- ‘burn’ (Skt 3sg. dáhati) > ∗θεχʷ- > τεφ- in τέφρᾱ ‘ashes’;
PIE ∗ gʰebʰal- ‘head’ (Toch. A ´spāl, OHG gebal ‘skull’) > ∗χεφαλ- > Att.-Ion.
κεφαλή;
PIE ∗ sengʷʰ- ‘speak solemnly’ vel sim. (Goth. siggwan ‘sing’), action noun
∗sóngʷʰos (Goth. saggws ‘song’), whence collective ∗ songʷʰáh₂ > ∗hονχʷᾱ́
> Att.-Ion. ὀμφή ‘divine voice’ (see also 5.4.1);
PIE ∗sámh₂dʰos ‘sand’ (ON sandr, Middle High German sam(b)t) > ∗hάμαθος
> ἄμαθος;
PIE ∗sweh₁- ‘become accustomed’ (Lat. suēscere), extended as ∗swēdʰ- in
derived noun ∗hϝήθος > ἦθος ‘accustomed place, custom’;
PIE ∗seh₁- sift’ (cf. OCS prosějati, Welsh hidl ‘sieve’), extended as ∗sēdʰ- in
∗hηθμ´ος  > ἠθμ´ος  ‘sieve, strainer’;
PIE ∗stembʰH- ‘prop’ (Skt stambʰi-, cf. Toch. B ´scama ‘(s)he stood’), action
noun ∗στέμφος ‘prop, support’ in cpd. ∗hą-στεμφής ‘with a (firm) support’
> Hom. ἀστεμφής ‘fixed, unmoved’.
In addition, a number of fossilized compounds and derivatives that are still ana-
lyzable on a purely Greek basis exhibit the effects of GL. Several involve the
prefix ∗hą- ‘same; with’ < PIE ∗ sm̥ - (Skt sa-), like the last isolated example cited
above, e.g.:
δελφʋ́̄ ς ‘womb’: ∗hα-δελφεϝ-ος´ ‘(born of the) same womb, uterine brother’ >
Ion. ἀδελφε´ος,  Att. ἀδελφ´ος  ‘brother’ (the latter apparently an allegro form);
Hom. λέχος ‘bed’: ∗hά-λοχος ‘(sharing the) same bed’ > Hom. ἄλοχος ‘wife’;
κέλευθος ‘path’: ∗hα-κ´ολουθος  ‘(walking the) same path’ > ἀκ´ολουθος  ‘com-
panion’;
Hom. σπέρχεσθαι ‘to hurry’, action noun ∗σπέρχος: ∗hα-σπερχές ‘with haste,
hastily’ > Hom. ἀσπερχές.
Note also:
PIE ∗sed- ‘sit down’, e.g. in ∗sédos ‘seat’ (Skt sádas) > Hom. ἕδος: innovative
Gk deriv. ∗hέδ-εθλον (cf. γένε-θλον ‘descent, ancestry’) > ἔδεθλον ‘abode;
ground, foundation’;
∗hέχɛ¯ν ‘to hold’ (see below), χɛ̄́ ρ ‘hand’: ∗hεχε-χɛ¯ρ-ίᾱ ‘hand-holding’ > ἐκεχɛ¯ρίᾱ
‘truce’ (with double application of GL).


===== PDF PAGE 158 =====
148 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
Since GL followed the assimilation of stops to following obstruents (see 3.4.4),
which often involved deaspiration, we should find alternations between aspirated
and unaspirated stops and between /h/ and zero. In fact such alternations still
occur in nine paradigms:³⁶
PIE ∗seǵʰ- ‘hold’ (Skt sáhate ‘(s)he prevails’) > pres. ∗hεχ-ε/ο- > ἔχɛ¯ν
‘to hold, to have’, with innovative zero-grade aor. > σχɛ˜ν ‘to get’ and
desiderative ∗seǵʰ-se/o- > future ἕξɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗dʰregʰ- ‘run’ (agent noun ∗dʰrogʰós ‘runner’ > τροχ´ος, OIr. droch, both
‘wheel’) > pres. ∗θρεχ-ε/ο- > τρέχɛ¯ν but fut. ∗θρεχ-σε/ο- > (ἀπο)θρέξεσθαι;
PIE ∗dʰrebʰ- ‘coagulate’ (cf. Middle English draf, OHG pl. trebir ‘dregs’) >
(trans.) pres. ∗θρεφ-ε/ο- > τρέφɛ¯ν but aor. ∗θρεφ-σ- > θρέψαι;
PIE ∗dʰrah₂gʰ- ‘disturb’ (cf. OCS raz-drazˇiti ‘to provoke, to enrage’) > pres.
∗θρᾱχ-jε/ο- > θρᾱ́ ττɛ¯ν, but pf. ∗θε-θρᾱχ- ‘be in a disturbed state’ > τετρᾱχ-
in Hom. plup. 3sg. τετρήχει ‘it was in an uproar’;
PIE ∗dʰuh₂- ‘smoke’ (cf. noun ∗dʰuh₂mós > Skt dʰ umásˉ , Lat fumus,ˉ  Gk θῡμ´ος
‘strong emotion’) extended in Gk ∗θῡφ- ‘burn up’, e.g. in pres. ∗ἐπι-θῡφ-
ε/ο- > ἐπιτʋ̄́ φεσθαι ‘to be consumed by fire’ but pf. ptc. ∗ἐπι-θε-θῡφ-μένο- >
ἐπιτεθῡμμένος ‘furious’;
PIE ∗dʰrubʰ- ‘break up’ (?; cf. Latvian pl. drubazas ‘splinters’?) > ∗θρυφ- in
pres. ∗θρυφ-jε/ο- > ∗θρυπʧε/ο- (see 3.6.3) > θρύπτɛ¯ν but intransitive aor.
∗θρυφ-ή- > aor. passive τρυφῆναι;
Gk ∗θαφ- ‘bury’ (< ∗dʰm̥ bʰ-, cf. Arm. damban ‘grave’?; so LIV s.v. 2.∗dʰembʰ ,
but only the zero grade of this root is attested anywhere) in pres. ∗θαφ-jε/ο-
> ∗θαπʧε/ο- (see 3.6.3) > θάπτɛ¯ν but intransitive aor. ∗θαφ-ή- > aor. passive
ταφῆναι;
Gk ∗θαχ- ‘swift’ in ∗θαχ-ύ- > ταχύς but cptv. ∗θαχ-jοh- >→ Hom. θάσσων;
Gk ∗θριχ- ‘hair’ in nom. sg. θρίξ, dat. pl. θριξί, but acc. sg. τρίχα, gen. sg. τριχ´ος,
etc.
On the other hand, at least four paradigms have leveled such alternations in favor
of the unaspirated alternant. Three are common verbs:
PIE ∗bʰeydʰ- ‘trust’ (Lat. fīdere, Goth. beidan ‘to wait for’) > ∗φειθ- in pres.
πείθεσθαι (with aor. πιθέσθαι and pf. πεποιθέναι), but trans. aor. πεῖσαι
‘to persuade’ and fut. πείσɛ¯ν (both already in Homer) in place of expected
∗φεῖσαι, ∗φείσɛ¯ν;
³⁶ I omit Hom. aor. ptc. ταφ ων´ ‘thunderstruck’, pf. τέθηπεν ‘(s)he is amazed’, since in my opinion the
-π- of the latter has not been convincingly explained (pace Barton 1993: 2 with fn. 3 and references,
5–7 with references); I also reject the proposed connection of this fragmentary paradigm with θάμβος
‘astonishment’ (see 3.4.5), which would involve an irregular sound correspondence.


===== PDF PAGE 159 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 149
PIE ∗bʰewdʰ- ‘be alert’ vel sim. (Skt pres. 3sg. bódʰati ‘(s)he observes’, Goth.
ana- biudan ‘to command’) > ∗φευθ- in Hom. pres. πεύθεσθαι ‘to try to find
out’ (with aor. πυθέσθαι), but fut. πεύσεσθαι (already in Homer) in place of
expected ∗φεύσεσθαι;
PIE ∗dʰewgʰ- ‘produce’ (Skt pres. 3sg. dógdʰi ‘(s)he milks’, Goth. daug ‘is
useful’) > ∗θευχ- in Hom. pres. τεύχɛ¯ν ‘to make, to fashion’ (with pf. ptc.
τετευχως´ ‘made, fashioned’; also aor. τυχɛ˜ν ‘to hit (a mark)’ by lexical split,
with new. pres. τυγχάνɛ¯ν), but aor. τε˜υξαι, fut. τεύξɛ¯ν (both Hom.) in place
of expected ∗θε˜υξαι, ∗θεύξɛ¯ν.
Note that all three verbs originally had thematic aorists in Greek. It might therefore
be argued that these roots were reanalyzed as πειθ-, πευθ-, τευχ- at an early period
when they had no sigmatic stems, and that the future and the sigmatic aorist are
later formations. The fourth leveled example is an adjective:
PIE ∗bʰénǵʰu- ~ ∗bʰn̥ ǵʰéw- ‘dense, numerous’ (cf. Skt cptv. báṃhīyas-‘more’)
→ ∗bʰn̥ ǵʰús (Skt bahús ‘much, many’) > ∗φαχύς > παχύς ‘thick’, with Hom.
cptv. πάσσων.
It is unclear why θάσσων preserved its aspirate (see above) while πάσσων under-
went leveling. But in any case the appearance of πάσσων in Homer offers us
valuable evidence for the date of GL. The form cannot be an Atticism in our
text, because the Attic comparative was παχύτερος; πάσσων must be a genuine
8th-century form. GL must therefore have occurred as a regular sound change at
least a few generations earlier, since time must be allowed for the alternation that
it created to be leveled out in this word.³⁷ On the other hand, it must have fol-
lowed assimilation in stop clusters, which can have occurred very early (see 3.4.4),
and apparently also the developments of stops followed by ∗j (Janko 1977, Miller
1977: 139; see 3.6.3). Hom. ὄφρα ‘while, until’ (cf. τ´οφρα ‘for that long, up till
then’) < ∗hjópʰr̥ could furnish further evidence if we could be sure that any of the
post-Homeric examples (notably in Pindar) are not just psilotic Homericisms.
Whether GL occurred at roughly the same time in all attested dialects is not
clear; for discussion, see 3.5.5.
By the 5th century BC, and probably long before, GL had ceased to be a general
rule of Greek phonology, at least in the Attic-Ionic dialects (see also section 3.5.5
ad fin.). Aside from the alternating roots listed above, it had been fragmented into
several rules each of which applied in a morphologically restricted environment,
as follows.
³⁷ This secure inference renders most discussions of the chronology of GL irrelevant.


===== PDF PAGE 160 =====
150 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
1) In reduplicating syllables, the root-initial aspirated stops φ, θ, χ were reg-
ularly replaced by the corresponding unaspirated stops π, τ, κ. Thus we
find pres. τιθέναι ‘to put (several), to be putting’, κιχράναι ‘to lend’, Hom.
κιχήμεναι ‘to find’; aor. (all Homeric) πέφραδε ‘he showed’, πεφιδέσθαι ‘to
spare’, πέφνε ‘he slew’, κεχάροντο ‘they rejoiced’; and dozens of perfects, e.g.
πεφάσθω ‘let it be said’, πεφυλαχέναι ‘to have guarded’ and πεφυλάχθαι ‘to
be on one’s guard’, τεθνάναι ‘to be dead’, τεθυκέναι ‘to have sacrificed’ and
τεθύσθαι ‘to have been sacrificed’, κεχηνέναι ‘to gape’, κεχρῆσθαι ‘to make
habitual use of ’, etc., etc.; there are no exceptions.
2) Roots of the shape θV˘ - (only) underwent deaspiration before the aorist pas-
sive suffix -θη-; thus τεθῆναι ‘to get put’, τυθῆναι ‘to get sacrificed’ (but
χυθῆναι ‘to get poured’, θραυσθῆναι ‘to be shattered’, etc.).
3) The aorist passive 2sg. imperative -θη-θι was dissimilated to -θητι, e.g. in
ἐνθῡμήθητι ‘think it through’, ἡττήθητι ‘yield!’
It is striking that in all these cases GL applies across only one syllable nucleus; evi-
dently such a rule was easier to learn than one that applied anywhere within the
word. However, there are also numerous potential cases in which only one syllable
nucleus intervenes, yet GL no longer applies: mediopassive verb endings begin-
ning with -σθ- never trigger GL in attested Greek (as can be seen from some of
the infinitives cited above), nor do the adverbial endings -φι, -θεν, -θι, though the
sound change must originally have applied to such forms. The ‘backward’ oper-
ation of GL in the passive aorist imperative must have resulted from some sort
of native-learner error, though the details remain obscure. This is an outstanding
example of the restriction and fragmentation of a phonological rule.
It is clear that medial ∗-h- did not trigger GL from isolated examples like θεος´
‘god’ < ∗θεh´ος, cf. θέσ-φατος ‘god-spoken’ (both < PIE ∗dʰh₁s-, cf. Lat. fānum
‘temple’ < ∗fasnom < ∗dʰh₁s-nó-m; full-grade collective ∗dʰéh₁s-na-h₂ in Oscan
acc. fı´ı´snam ‘temple’). Since intervocalic ∗h was still being lost in the Mycenaean
period (see 3.5.1), we might be tempted to see this as evidence that GL was a post-
Mycenaean change. Unfortunately an alternative explanation is possible: even in
languages in which initial /h/ is fully voiceless, intervocalic /h/ often is not; prehis-
toric Greek could have been such a language, and that difference could have been
sufficient to prevent non-initial ∗h from triggering GL (Ives Goddard, p.c. 1983).
3.5.5 Irregularities of aspiration
Though the regular sound changes discussed in 3.2.4 (ad init.), 3.5.1, 3.5.2, and
3.5.4 account for the pattern of initial /h-/ and aspirated consonants in Greek,
there are notable irregularities in individual words, not all of which can be
explained by dialect borrowing or decomposition (as in 3.5.1). This section will


===== PDF PAGE 161 =====
3.5 THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK ∗H 151
discuss some salient cases in Classical Attic, as well as some that are widespread in
Greek dialects; for discussion of examples confined (mostly) to individual dialects,
see especially Buck (1955: 52–5, 59–61).
Leveling within paradigms is the simplest and most convincing explanation
for phonologically unexpected outcomes, but it accounts for only a minority of
cases. It seems clear that the ∗h- which must have arisen by copying (see 3.5.2)
in ∗hɛ¯μι ‘I am’, ∗hεhεντι ‘they are’, ∗hήhą ‘I was’, etc., has been eliminated by lev-
eling on pres. 3sg. ἐστι, ipf. 3sg. ἦς, the ‘pivotal’ forms of the paradigm (Lejeune
1972: 121); thus we find only ɛ̄̓ μι, ɛ̄̓ σι, ἦα, etc. Conversely, the copied /h-/ has
been leveled through the paradigms of ἧσται ‘(s)he is seated’ < PIE ∗ḗs-, ἕσται
‘(s)he is wearing’ < PIE ∗wés-; in the latter case such a development might have
been encouraged by the derived noun ˜ɛ̓ μα ‘garment’ < ∗wésmn̥ , in the former
by lexical analogy with ἑδ- ‘sit’ < ∗sed- (Lejeune, loc. cit.). The consistent rough
breathing of εὕɛ¯ν ‘to singe’ must reflect a similar process (which in that case was
almost inevitable, since copied /h-/ occurred throughout the present stem). The
rough breathing of aor. indic. ἕσπετο ‘(s)he followed’ (stem σπ-έ/´ο-, e.g. in inf.
σπέσθαι) must likewise have been leveled from pres. indic. ἕπεται, ipf. indic. ɛ̔̄́ πετο
(see 3.5.2)—possibly except in Homer, where such forms could conceivably reflect
an inherited reduplicated stem without augment.
Some other cases can be the result of lexical analogy between words of related
meaning. The rough breathing of ἕσπερος ‘evening’ < ∗wésperos (cf. Lat. vesper)
can reflect lexical analogy with ∗hαϝhως´ ‘dawn’ (see 3.5.2, and cf. Att. ἕως; but
see Sturm 2018 for an alternative explanation). Those two words are apparently
responsible, in turn, for the rough breathing of Att. ἡμέρᾱ ‘day’ (Schwyzer 1939:
305), a change not reflected in other dialects and apparently incomplete even in
early Attic inscriptions (Buck 1955: 54, Threatte 1980: 500). A lexical analogy
operating in the other direction might explain the smooth breathing of αὔριον
‘tomorrow’ < ∗h₂aus-r- (cf. Lith. aušrà ‘dawn’, see 3.5.3; cf. Lejeune 1972: 121,
122 with fn. 2). Various other words, most notably ἵππος ‘horse’ and ὅρος ‘bound-
ary’, exhibit an unexpected initial /h-/ (Schwyzer 1939: 306). For several of these
puzzles (and some others), see Sturm (2018) for an alternative solution.
A more systematic puzzle is the fact that non-psilotic dialects initial upsilon is
always ὑ-, regardless of its etymological origin. To be sure, a substantial propor-
tion of cases can be explained by regular sound change, or by some combination of
sound change and lexical analogy. ὗς ‘pig’, ῞ῡει ‘it’s raining’, ὕπνος ‘sleep’, υἱύς ‘son’
all reflect inherited ∗s-; ʋ̄̔ μήν ‘membrane’ reflects ∗sy- (see 3.5.1); ὑγιής ‘healthy’
reflects ∗h₂y- (see 3.2.4), and Hom. ὑσμɩ̄́νη ‘combat’ probably reflects ∗Hy-; Doric
acc. ʋ̄̔ μέ ‘you (pl.)’ reflects ∗h-copying: ∗hυhμέ < ∗ὐhμέ < ∗usmé (see 3.5.2). The
preposition ὑπο´ ‘below’ can reflect ∗ supo (cf. Toch. B spe ‘near’), and its rough
breathing can have spread analogically to ὑπέρ ‘above’ ←< ∗upér (cf. OHG obar,
ubiri, Skt upári), precisely as in Latin (sub, super), and in contrast to Sanskrit
(úpa, upári, with the reverse analogy). But at least ὕδωρ ‘water’ ←< coll. ∗udṓr


===== PDF PAGE 162 =====
152 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
(cf. Rigvedic Skt udā́ ), ὕστερος ‘later’ (cf. Skt úttaras ‘upper’), and ὑφαίνɛ¯ν ‘to
weave’ (cf. Skt inj. 2sg. ubʰna ̄́s) exhibit a rough breathing that can only be the result
of a phonological rule—one that applied fairly late, to judge from the fact that it
ignores GL (as in the last example cited). It used to be supposed that a sequence
of regular sound changes ∗u- > ∗ju- > hu-could account for such an outcome (cf.
Schwyzer 1939: 305 with references, rejecting that proposal); but that hypothesis
has become untenable, since it now seems clear that only PIE ∗Hy-, not also ∗ y-,
yields Gk /h-/ (see 3.2.4 and 3.6.1), and no alternative is generally accepted.³⁸
Especially in inscriptions we encounter regressive assimilation of aspiration
between stops, apparently undoing GL. Examples are widely distributed in time
and space; typical are:
θυφλος´ ‘blind’ DGE 786 (West Ionic, 7th century BC)
φεφύλαχσο ‘guard!’ DGE 538.4 (Boiotian, early 6th century BC)
τᾶς φαρθένοˉ ‘of the girl’ DGE 661.28 (Arkadian, 5th century BC)
καταθίθεθθαι ‘to accept mortgages’ DGE 179.VI.4–5 (Cretan, mid 5th century
BC; = Attic κατατίθεσθαι)
Instances in Attic inscriptions are numerous, and there are also examples of pro-
gressive assimilation; see Threatte (1980: 455–68) for examples and discussion.
Transposition of aspiration from one stop to another is also occasionally attested;
for examples see e.g. Buck (1955: 60) and Threatte, loc. cit.
Miller (1977: 143–4) (citing additional examples, with references) argues that
at least some of these forms reflect not a reversal of GL, but a state of the language
in which GL had not yet occurred. That none of the inscriptions he cites offers
counterexamples to that hypothesis can reflect the fact that most are short,³⁹ but
the fact that Boiotian, in particular, seems to offer no examples of GL before the
late 5th century BC is more interesting (though one needs to remember that all
the longer Boiotian inscriptions date from the 3rd century BC and later). Since
Boiotian is conservative in a number of other details, it is possible that GL did
not occur in that dialect until the 5th century BC; in that case it must have spread
slowly through the Greek dialect continuum, probably beginning in East Ionic
around 800 BC at the latest. (Threatte 1980: 456 makes it clear that the situation in
Attic is very different; examples in Attic inscriptions do reflect a reversal of GL.)
On the other hand, it is also possible that GL occurred at an early date in all
dialects, that it was reversed in Boiotian (and perhaps in other dialects) by assim-
ilation of aspirates, and that the latter was subsequently eliminated under the
³⁸ For an interesting hypothesis, see Jatteau (2016: 303–18).
³⁹ Cretan inscriptions are a special case. In the archaic (and archaizing) Cretan alphabet, only /th/
is represented by a distinctive letter θ, /ph/ and /kh/ being represented by π and κ respectively; that
substantially reduces the number of potential examples even in very long documents, such as DGE 179
(the Gortyn Laws).


===== PDF PAGE 163 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 153
influence of those dialects that had not undergone the reversal (the great majority).
Such a sequence of changes is reasonably plausible precisely because PIE root con-
straints ensured that aspiration was non-contrastive in inherited roots after the
devoicing of aspirates (Hoenigswald 1965: 59), and Greek acquired few new roots
that provided exceptions to that generalization (e.g. κεύθɛ¯ν ‘to conceal’), with the
result that relevant learner errors could cause little confusion and would therefore
be more likely to be ‘acceptable’ and to catch on.⁴⁰
On a somewhat more wide-angle view, once GL had occurred the contrast
between aspirated and unaspirated voiceless stops was neutralized in many posi-
tions (as Philomen Probert reminds me). Subsequent shifts in both directions are
perhaps to be expected, and it is not even necessarily clear what particular spellings
of stops in neutralized positions mean in structural terms.
3.6 The development of PIE ∗ y
3.6.1 Sievers’ Law in Greek
The most comprehensive review of the development of Sievers’ Law (SL) in Greek
is Barber (2013), on which this section is largely based.⁴¹
We have seen (in 2.2.4 (ii)) that the Lindeman’s Law phenomenon, in which
word-initial ∗CR- varies with ∗CR̥ -, is difficult to assess even for PIE. Examples
with ∗R̥ are not rare in Greek, but many could have arisen, or at least been favored,
by paradigmatic leveling. Examples that cannot be explained in that fashion are
δύο, Hom. δύω ‘two’ vs. δ ωδεκα´ ‘twelve’, δίς ‘twice’ (Barber 2013: 140), and Aiolic
ἴα ‘one’ (see 4.3.7). ἀνα-βιῶναι ‘to revive, to come back to life’ is probably a member
of the class of intransitive aorists that reflect PIE statives/fientives (see 4.2.2 (iv))
and thus reflects ∗ gʷih₃-éh₁- (Francis 1971: 77–87, Klein 1988: 270); βίᾱ ‘force’
is at least as likely to reflect ∗ gʷih₂-ah₂- as to be a root noun (cf. the inconclusive
discussion of Barber 2013: 133–4), and a laryngeal probably followed the high
vowel in βιος´ ‘bow’ and similar examples (Barber 2013: 135–7); χι ων´ ‘snow’ could
owe its syllabic ι to the lost zero-grade stem ∗ǵʰim- (Barber 2013: 137); κύων ‘dog’
could owe its syllabic high vowel to its oblique stem κυν-, and so on.
Examples of SL syllabic alternants of nonvocalic sonorants are also hard to find;
two plausible examples are:
⁴⁰ How this situation was affected by the surface exceptions to GL that developed as the rule was
restricted and fragmented remains to be investigated. It is not clear that they would have made much
difference to the intelligibility of learner errors, but if they did, an early reversal of GL would be more
likely than a later reversal—in which case it would be difficult to distinguish that scenario from one in
which GL had not applied in the dialects in question.
⁴¹ Barber is extremely cautious about drawing conclusions. While such an approach is certainly valu-
able, especially in sifting the evidence, I believe that we can be somewhat more definite, so long as we
remember that every statement about prehistory is in principle probabilistic.


===== PDF PAGE 164 =====
154 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
δαπάνη ‘expense’, orig. collective to ∗dh₂pn̥ óm ‘sacrificial meal’ (cf. ON tafn
‘sacrifice’, Lat. damnum ‘loss’);
πλατάνιστος ‘plane tree’ (lit. ‘the broadest one’) ← ∗πλατανος´ ‘broad’ <
∗pl̥th₂n̥ ós (cf. OIr. lethan, Welsh llydan; but Rix’s Law cannot be absolutely
excluded in this case, see 3.2.2).
But most examples of suffixal -αν-, -αρ-, etc., are of other origin, or of unclear ori-
gin; for instance, the present stems in -ανε/ο- must ultimately reflect thematization
of infixed present stems ending in ∗ -n̥ H- (see 4.2.1 (ii)).
However, there is abundant evidence for the development of ∗ -y- ~ ∗-i- fol-
lowing a non-initial consonant or cluster. The pattern of Homeric comparative
adjectives in ∗-joh- ~ ∗-jον- (originally s-stems, see 5.4.2 (ii)) strongly suggests
that SL remained a phonological rule well down into the separate prehistory of
Greek (see the comprehensive discussion of Barber 2013: 145–86). Though few
actual examples can reflect PIE elatives with accented full-grade roots (because
most have been remodeled on the basis of the corresponding positive adjectives),
a majority of those with light root-syllables ending in consonants exhibit reflexes of
the appropriate SL alternant beginning with ∗j (note that I have silently corrected
the Atticizing spellings of our received text, replacing unoriginal long vowels in
roots; see e.g. Wackernagel 1916: 13 with references):⁴²
μέζων ‘greater’ Il. 15.121, etc.; Myc. nom. pl. me-zo-e, neut. me-zo-a₂ < PIE
∗méǵ-yos- (Av. neut. maziioˉ; remodeled in Lat. neut. maius);
κρέσσων ‘more powerful’ Il. 1.80, etc. ←< pre-Gk ∗krét-yos-, cf. κρατύς ‘power-
ful’ < ∗kr̥ tús;
χείρων (i.e. χɛ̄́ ρων) ‘inferior’ Il. 20.434, etc. ←< ∗χερ-jοh- (etymology unknown);
acc. sg. πάσσονα ‘stouter, more strongly built’ Od. 5x ←< ∗παχ-jοh-, cf. παχύς;
βράσσων ‘shorter’ Il. 10.226 ←< ∗βραχ-jοh-, cf. βραχύς;
θάσσον adv. ‘more quickly’ Il. 2.440, etc. ←< ∗θαχ-jοh-, cf. ταχύς;
μάσσον adv. ‘longer, farther’ Od. 8.203 ←< ∗μακ-jοh-, cf. μακρ´ος;
ὑπολίζονες nom. pl. ‘much smaller’ Il. 18.519 ←< ∗ὀλιγ-jοh-, cf. ὀλίγος;
μάλλον adv. ‘more, rather’ Il. 1.563, etc. (very common) ←< ∗μαλ-jοh-, cf. μάλα,
sup. μάλιστα.
To this list can be added two examples which happen not to occur in Homer:
τοὔλασσον ‘the lesser’, Theognis 269 ←< ∗ἐλαχ-jοh-, cf. ἐλάχιστον ‘the least’
Hymn to Hermes 573;
βάσσων ‘deeper’, Herodian (somewhat doubtful, Seiler 1950: 52) ←< ∗βαθ-jοh-,
cf. βάθιστον ‘deepest’ Il. 8.14.
⁴² The preform of μείων ‘less’ is unclear; it might reflect ∗méw-yos- or ∗méyw-iyos- (Myc. me-u-jo ~
me-wi-jo; see Aura Jorro 1999 s.v.). ἀμείνων ‘better’ seems to be an n-stem that has been attracted into
this class of comparatives because of its meaning; see Frisk s.v. with references.


===== PDF PAGE 165 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 155
Only three Homeric comparatives with roots of this shape exhibit syllabic -ι- in
the suffix:⁴³
κακίων ‘worse’ Od. 4x, cf. κακ´ος, sup. κάκιστος (but Myc. nom. pl. ka-zo-e);
γλυκίων ‘sweeter’ Il. 1.249, etc., cf. γλυκύς (but nom. pl. neut. γλύσσονα
Xenophanes 38.2);
φιλίων ‘more welcome’ Od. 19.351 = 24.268, cf. φίλος (but usual cptv. φίλτερος,
sup. φίλτατος).
A further example that might fail to occur in Homer by chance is
βράδιον adv. ‘more slowly’, Hesiod Works and Days 528, cf. βραδύς, sup. nom.
pl. βάρδιστοι Il. 23.310, 530.⁴⁴
On the other hand, almost all comparatives of this class with heavy root-syllables
ending in consonants exhibit syllabic -ι- in the suffix, not only in Homer but in
later Greek as well. Homeric examples—mostly nom.-acc. sg. neut., for metrical
reasons—include:
καλλίονες nom. pl. ‘more handsome’ Od. 10.396 (and κάλλιον ‘better, more
appropriate’ ten times);
κέρδιον ‘better, more fitting’ Il. 3.41, etc. (more than thirty times);
ἄλγιον ‘worse, harder to bear’ Il. 18.278, etc.;
ῥι ̄́γιον ‘worse, more frightful’ Il. 1.325, etc.;
αἴσχιον ‘more shameful’ Il. 21.437.
Posthomeric examples⁴⁵ include:
ἥδιον neut. ‘more pleasant’ Herodotos 2.46.2; ᾱδιον῎ Sappho 62.3;
ὕψιον adv. ‘more loftily’ Pindar fr. 213.1;
π´ορσιον adv. ‘further’ Pindar Olympian I.114.
There are only two exceptions in Homer:
ἆσσον adv. ‘nearer’ Il. 1.335, etc. (twenty-five times) < ∗ἄγχ-jον, cf. ἄγχι ‘near’;
ἥσσων ‘inferior’ Il. 16.722, etc. (four times) ←<∗ἡκ-jοh-, cf. adv. ἧκα ‘a little’.
Though the Ionic derivative ἑσσõσθαι ‘be defeated’ exhibits a short vowel in the
root, that must be an (unexplained) innovation, since all other members of this
word-family exhibit η.
⁴³ Hom. βραχι ̄́ων ‘arm’, though apparently derived from βραχύς, was not necessarily a comparative
in origin (Ruijgh 1968: 147–8). However, see now Kostopoulos forthcoming (b), on this form and the
Attic comparatives with lengthening.
⁴⁴ κοθρασίων in Alkman 87 is too corrupt to be of any use; see Campbell (1988) ad loc.
⁴⁵ I omit those that occur only with long ῑ in Attic and those that are not attested before the Hellenistic
period; for comprehensive discussion, see Seiler (1950).


===== PDF PAGE 166 =====
156 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
I have presented this pattern in detail because it is exactly the pattern we should
expect to find if SL had been a phonological rule applying to this class of forms for
some time during the prehistory of Greek but was no longer applicable at the time
of our earliest texts.
Somewhat surprisingly, this conclusion is corroborated by the pattern of the-
matic nominals in ∗-yo- (Barber 2013: 187–213). An overwhelming majority of old
or probably old examples with non-syllabic ∗-y- exhibit light preceding syllables
(pp. 211–13); the following are typical:
PIE ∗ályos, neut. ∗ályod ‘other’ (Lat. alius, aliud, Lydian neut. aλad) > ἄλλος,
ἄλλο;
PIE ∗médʰyos ‘middle’ (Skt mádʰyas, Lat. medius) > μέσος;
PIE ∗kóryos ‘detachment’ (Goth. harjis, Lith. kãrias, both ‘army’; OIr. cuire
‘company, host’) > ∗κοιρο- in Hom. κοίρανος ‘commander’;
PIE ∗kʷóti ‘how many?’ (Skt káti, Lat. quot) → ∗kʷótyos > π´οσος;
PIE ∗sókʷh₂oy- ‘companion’ (Skt sákʰā) → ∗sókʷyos (with regular loss of ∗h₂,
see 2.2.4 (i); Lat. socius ‘ally’, OE seċġ ‘retainer’) in denom. ∗hą-hοκjε-jε/ο-
‘accompany’ > Hom. ἀοσσɛ˜ν ‘to help’;
PIE ∗ aperos ̄́ ‘bank, shore’ (OE ˉofer, Middle High German uover), deriv.
∗ᾱπερjος῎ > ᾱπɛ῎ ¯ρος  ‘mainland’ > Att.-Ion. ἤπɛ¯ρος;
(post-)PIE ∗pedyós ‘foot-, of feet’ (cf. Lat. ped-‘foot’, etc.) > πεζ´ος ‘on foot’;
(post-)PIE ∗h₃ókʷyos ‘eye-, of eyes’ (cf. Toch. B ek ‘eye’, etc.) in Hom. μελάν-
οσσος ‘black-eyed’;
(post-)PIE ∗h₃néryos ‘dream-, of dreams’ (cf. Hom. ὄναρ ‘dream’; coll. ∗h₃nṓr
with suffix ∗-yo- in Arm. anowrǰ ‘dream’) > ὄνɛ¯ρος ‘dream-god, dream’;
PIE ∗kóm ‘with’ (Lat. cum) in pre-Gk ∗komyós ‘common’ > κοιν´ος;
Gk ∗ξυνj´ος ‘common’ (cf. ξύν ‘with’) > ξῡν´ος.
By contrast, old nominals with ∗ -yo- following a heavy syllable ending in a con-
sonant are very few; a possible example is λο˜υσσον ‘fir-tree pith’ (Barber 2013:
94 with references). On the other hand, the heavy SL alternant ∗-io- has spread
very widely in Greek, probably encouraged by the fact that there was at least one
homonymous suffix that occurred after light roots (see 2.2.4 (ii)); derived adjec-
tives like δαιμ´ονιος  ‘supernatural, extraordinary’, σκ´οτιος  ‘dark, clandestine’, etc.,
are common even in Homer. In this class of forms SL had clearly broken down
well before the time of our earliest texts.
Among present stems in ∗-ye/o-, all trace of the heavy SL alternant ∗-ie/o- has
been lost in Greek (Barber 2013: 218–19, 244–7, 293–375). Barber establishes a
probable reason for this peculiarity: during the earliest part of the separate pre-
history of Greek, the suffix was added almost exclusively to light root-syllables (as
in Vedic; pp. 224–44), partly because it was often added to zero-grade forms and


===== PDF PAGE 167 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 157
partly by sheer accident; almost all the examples that violate SL can have been cre-
ated after SL had ceased to be a generally applicable phonological rule. However,
it seems clear that in at least one instance an inherited suffix ∗-ié/ó- was replaced
by ∗-yé/ó- (pace Barber 2013: 116–18):
PIE ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-ié/ó- ‘be sharp-eared’ (Goth. hausjan, OE hīeran, both ‘to
hear’) > ∗akowsié/ó- >→ ∗ἀκοϝhjε/ο- > ἀκούɛ¯ν ‘to hear’ (see 3.6.3 on the
loss of ∗j).
The compound is opaque both in Germanic and in Greek and is therefore proba-
bly inherited. So far as I can see, this example shows that the light alternant ∗-ye/o-
was generalized in present stems at some point in the prehistory of Greek.
A more complex case are the feminine nominals in short -α, most of which
reflect the PIE type in ∗-ih₂ ~ ∗-yáh₂- (see 2.3.1, 2.4.2 (iii)). A disyllabic reflex -ια
typically appears after obstruent-plus-sonorant clusters (see 3.2.3) and can reflect
the operation of SL, at least by generalization from the oblique stem ∗-iáh₂- > -ιᾱ-
—though the fact that the same outcome appears in πρίασθαι ‘to buy’ strongly
suggests that SL also applied directly to the reflex of ∗ih₂. In all other cases ∗ y was
generalized, possibly because at an early period a large proportion of these femi-
nines were formed to athematic stems with zero-grade suffixes in the oblique cases
(thus u-stem ∗-u-yáh₂-, participial ∗ -n̥ t-yáh₂-, etc.).
Finally, one detail of the formation of present stems suggests that the converse
of SL might have been (part of ) a phonological rule at some point in the prehis-
tory of Greek. Present stems in -αν-ε/ο- probably reflect thematization of ∗ -n̥ H-,
extracted from nasal-infixed presents of laryngeal-final roots and generalized as a
suffix; but it is striking that that suffix occurs exclusively after heavy root-syllables.
After light roots ending in a consonant we instead find -νε/ο-; the only unarguable
examples are δάκνɛ¯ν ‘to bite (serially), to be biting’, τάμνɛ¯ν ‘to cut (several), to be
cutting’, and κάμνɛ¯ν ‘to be working (hard), to struggle, to be tired’, but there are
no clear counterexamples. However, I know of no other evidence that points in
the same direction.
3.6.2 Word-initial ∗ y
PIE word-initial ∗y- appears in Greek as ζ-. In Classical Attic and Ionic (though not
necessarily in other dialects) zeta spells the consonant cluster /sd/, phonetically
[zd]; in our text of Sappho and Alkaios it is spelled σδ. A probable chain of natural
sound changes that will give that result is ∗[j] (i.e. the front unround semivowel,
clearly the pronunciation of PIE ∗y) > ∗[ɟ] (as in some dialects of Spanish) > ∗[ʤ]
(as in Italian) > ∗[ʣ] (as in Old Frisian) > [zd] (a metathesis parallel to the one
that yielded zˇd in Old Church Slavonic). The following examples are secure:


===== PDF PAGE 168 =====
158 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗yugóm ‘yoke’ (Skt yugám, Lat. iugum) > ∗ʤugón > ζυγ´ον;
PIE ∗yéwgos ‘yoke (of oxen)’ (Lat. pl. iugeraˉ, a measure of land originally
defined by what a yoke of oxen could plow in a specified time) > ∗ʤéwgos
> ζε˜υγος, Myc. dat. pl. ze-u-ke-si;
PIE ∗ yewg- ‘join’ (cf. Skt aor. subj. 3sg. yójate) in aor. ζε˜υξαι, etc.;
PIE ∗yéwos ‘grain’ (Skt yávas) in Hom. pl. ζειαί (either with metrical lengthen-
ing or a deriv. in ∗-yā-; see Frisk s.v.);
PIE ∗ yes- ‘bubble’ (cf. Skt yásyati ‘it foams’) in pres. ∗yés-e/o- (cf. OHG jesan ‘to
ferment’) > ∗ʤéh-e/o- (or the like) > ζɛ˜ν ‘to boil’, Myc. fut. ptc. ze-so-me-no;
PIE ∗yoh₃s- ‘put on a belt’ (cf. Av. yåŋhaiia-‘gird’) > ∗ʤˉoh- in  aor. ζῶσαι, ζ ωνη´
‘belt’, etc.;
PIE ∗yuHs- ‘broth’ (Lat. iusˉ ) > ∗ʤˉuh- in ζʋ́̄ μη ‘yeast’.
Evidently the first stage of this development occurred before the Mycenaean
period; the last three demonstrate that it also occurred before ∗h-copying (see 3.5.2
ad fin.).
3.6.3 Postconsonantal ∗ y
The development of postconsonantal ∗y in Greek was even more complex than the
development of ∗s adjacent to sonorants. Exactly what happened was conditioned
by the preceding consonant, as follows.
When preceded by a sonorant or ∗h which was in turn preceded by ∗ w, ∗ y was
lost without a trace before any other relevant sound changes occurred. There are
three certain examples:
PIE ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-ié/ó- ‘be sharp-eared’ (Goth. hausjan, OE hīeran, both ‘to
hear’) > ∗akowsié/ó- >→ ∗ἀκοϝhjέ/´ο- >  ∗ἀκοϝhέ/´ο- >→  ἀκούɛ¯ν ‘to hear’;
PIE ∗h₂árh₃wr̥ ‘plowing’ (OIr. arbor ‘grain, crop’) > ∗árowr̥ → ∗ἄροϝρjα > Hom.
ἄρουρα ‘plowland, plowed field’ (Barber 2013: 296);
pre-Gk ∗élh₂wr̥ ‘driving’ (r/n-stem, cf. aor. ἐλάσαι ‘to drive’): derived pres.
∗ἐλαϝν-jε/ο- > ἐλαύνɛ¯ν ‘to drive (several), to be driving’ (Barber 2013: 89,
296).
A fourth possible example is:
pre-Gk ∗érewr̥ ‘search’ →∗ἔρεϝνjα > ἔρευνα;
it is true this noun does not appear before the 5th century, while the verb ἐρευνᾶν
is attested already in Homer (three times), but it does not follow that the noun is a
backformation (as Frisk s.v. ἐρευνάω states); accidents of attestation might account


===== PDF PAGE 169 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 159
for that pattern. Whether ∗ y was lost after other consonant clusters is unclear. A
plausible example is
PIE ∗h₂ugsié/ó- ‘grow’ (?; cf. Av. 3sg. uxšiieiti) >→ ∗αὐξjε/ο- > αὔξεσθαι (LIV
s.v. ∗h₂u̯ eks);
however, it is also possible that the prehistory of this stem was quite different,
involving a full-grade root (see 3.2.2) and no ∗y (cf. Barber 2013: 288).
After single consonants and other clusters ∗y survived and triggered extensive
changes, most of which clearly occurred before the Mycenaean period. (For exten-
sive discussion and a possible relative chronology, see Risch 1979, with discussion
by the conferees on pp. 278–81.)
The cluster ∗ly eventually yielded λλ in most dialects. The only phonetically
natural path to that outcome is ∗ly > ∗[lʲ:] > λλ, i.e. mutual assimilation of ∗[l] and
∗[j], yielding a long palatalized lateral, followed by depalatalization of the long
lateral. Since an alternative outcome is attested (see below), it is clear that only
the stage ∗[lʲ:] had been reached in Proto-Greek. Only three of the examples are
certainly inherited from PIE:
PIE ∗ályos, neut. ∗ályod ‘other’ (Lat. alius, aliud, Lydian neut. aλad) > ἄλλος,
ἄλλο;
PIE ∗sál-ye/o- ‘be jumping’ (Lat. salīre) > ἅλλεσθαι;
PIE ∗stél-ye/o- ‘make ready’ (OCS posteljetŭ ‘(s)he will spread out’) > στέλλɛ¯ν
‘to equip, to provide; to send’ (LIV s.v. ∗stel),
though the PIE meaning of the third example is somewhat difficult to recover.
Several Homeric presents are archaic denominatives, constructed by deleting the
thematic vowel of the noun or adjective and adding ∗-jε/ο- at some point within
the prehistory of Greek. At least two are widely attested and likely to be fairly old:
PIE ∗póyḱos ‘decorated’ vel sim. (cf. Skt purupé´sas ‘multiform’, Goth. filu-
faihs ‘manifold’) >→ Gk ∗ποικιλ´ο-ς ‘many-colored’ (Hom., etc., ποικίλος by
Wheeler’s Law, see 3.8) → pres. ∗ποικιλ-jε- ‘make many-colored’ > ποικίλλɛ¯ν
‘to embroider’;
ἄγγελο-ς ‘messenger’ (loanword, see Frisk s.v.) → pres. ∗ἀγγελ-jε- ‘be a messen-
ger’ > ἀγγέλλɛ¯ν ‘to announce, to proclaim’.
Other similar examples are δαιδάλλɛ¯ν ‘to decorate, to embellish’ (δαίδαλος ‘mar-
vellously made’) and ναυτίλλεσθαι ‘to sail’ (ναυτίλος ‘sailor’). The antiquity of any
given example is of course a matter of guesswork, because the formation clearly
became productive; but the fact that it became productive is indirect evidence for a
‘critical mass’ of early examples (not all of which need have survived to be attested,


===== PDF PAGE 170 =====
160 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
of course). A number of non-denominative presents in -λλε/ο- might reflect ∗-ly-
or ∗-ln-; that problem will be discussed in 5.2.2.
A different outcome is attested for Cyprian: on the Idalion bronze the gen. pl.
of ‘the other’ appears as to-na-i-lo-ne ∗τõν αἴλˉον (Masson 217.14).⁴⁶ It seems clear
that in this dialect ∗[lʲlʲ], instead of being depalatalized, was dissimilated to [jl],
at least when a low vowel preceded. Whether that amounts to a violation of the
Obligatory Contour Principle (OCP)⁴⁷ is an interesting question, but in any case
an identical development is well attested in another class of cases. When preceded
by ∗ a or ∗ o (but not by other vowels), the clusters ∗ ny, ∗ ry, and ∗ wy were first
assimilated to ∗[nʲ:], ∗[rʲ:], and (presumably) ∗[ɥ:], then dissimilated to [jn], [jr],
and [jw]—i.e., ιν, ιρ, and ιϝ—respectively. This development occurred in all the
attested dialects, so in principle the entire process could have run its course in
Proto-Greek. Examples are fairly numerous; some were inherited from PIE, while
many more can be reconstructed on the basis of related Greek words. Inherited
examples include:
PIE pres. ∗ gʷm̥ -yé/ó- ‘step (repeatedly), walk’ (Lat. venīre ‘to come’) > ∗ gʷąm-
yé/ó- > ∗γʷąνjε/ο- > βαίνɛ¯ν ‘to go’;
PIE ∗h₁n̥ h₃mn̥ -yé/ó- ‘name’ (verb; Goth. namnjan, OE nemnan) >→ ∗ὀνομąν-
jε/ο- > ὀνομαίνɛ¯ν ‘to name’;
PIE ∗ mn̥ yétor ‘(s)he is mentally active’ → post-PIE ∗ mn̥ yétoy (Skt mányate
‘(s)he thinks’) > ∗μąνjετοι >→ μαίνεται ‘(s)he is raving’;
PIE ∗ǵʰr̥ yé/ó- ‘be pleased with’ vel sim. (Old Lat. horitur ‘(s)he encourages,
urges’) > ∗χαρjε/ο- > χαίρɛ¯ν ‘to rejoice, to be glad’;
PIE ∗kóryos ‘detachment’ (Goth. harjis, Lith. kãrias, both ‘army’; OIr. cuire
‘company, host’) > ∗κοιρο- in Hom. κοίρανος ‘commander’;
PIE ∗h₂áwis ~ ∗h₂áwy- ‘bird’ (Lat. avis) > ∗αἰϝ- in αἰϝετ´ος  > αἰετ´ος  ‘eagle’;
PIE ∗plówyom ‘boat’ (ON fley) > ∗πλ´οϝjον > πλοῖον.
Greek innovations on a PIE basis include:
PIE ∗kóm ‘with’ (Lat. cum) in pre-Gk ∗kom-yó-s ‘common’ > ∗κονj´ος  > κοιν´ος;
⁴⁶ Elean αἰλ´οτρια might be an error (Schwyzer 1939: 272); the usual form of ‘other’ in Elean is the
familiar ἄλλος.
⁴⁷ On the OCP, see, e.g., Goldsmith (1990: 309–18). The basic idea is that identical adjacent seg-
ments (or tones, etc.) are not allowed; in a word such as πολλοί the geminate ‘λλ’ is actually a single
consonant linked to two timing slots. One might therefore expect that geminates would not develop
into sequences of different segments, yet it seems clear that ∗njnj, etc., did develop into ∗jn, etc., when
preceded by ∗a and ∗o in the prehistory of Greek. Since the OCP is a matter of the syntagmatic orga-
nization of sounds, not of phonetics, it seems possible that some combination of misperception and
difficulty articulating a geminate might simply override the OCP in the course of language acquisition;
in effect, learners might fail to learn the geminate. Alternatively, the fact that the geminate is partly in
the coda of one syllable and partly in the onset of the next might make it possible for the beginning
and end of the geminate to diverge. For similar West Germanic cases involving geminate semivowels,
see Ringe and Taylor (2014: 53, 65–7).


===== PDF PAGE 171 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 161
PIE pres. ∗u-né-bʰ- ‘be weaving’ (Skt 2sg. sám unap) → ∗ubʰ-né-H- (Skt inj. 2sg.
ubʰnā́ s, 3sg. with augment aubʰnāt) → ∗ubʰ-n̥ -H-yé- > ∗ὐφανjε- > ὑφαίνɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂ánkoˉ ‘sharp bend’ >→ ∗ankṓ (OE anga ‘sting, goad’) > ἀγκ ων´ ‘elbow’;
fem. deriv. ∗ἄνκονjα ‘bent arm’ in Hom. dat. pl. ἀγκοίνηισι.
Derivatives of recognizable Greek words and roots are numerous, e.g.:
εὐφραίνɛ¯ν ‘to gladden; to enjoy oneself ’ < ∗εὐφραν-jε-, cf. εὔφρων ‘cheerful,
glad’;
pres. φαίνεσθαι ‘to appear’ < ∗φαν-jε-, cf. aor. pass. φανῆναι (parallel to χαίρɛ¯ν,
χαρῆναι, see above);
pres. ῥαίνɛ¯ν ‘to sprinkle’ < ∗ῥαν-jε-, cf. aor. pass. ptc. ῥανθείς, both in Pindar;
ἐχθαίρɛ¯ν ‘to hate’ < ∗ἐχθαρjε- with ∗αρ < ∗ r ̥, cf. ἐχθρος´ ‘hated, enemy’;
χίμαιρα ‘she-goat’ < ∗χίμαρjα, cf. χίμαρος ‘he-goat’;
μοῖρα ‘portion, share; fate’ < ∗hμορjα,´  cf. μορος´  ‘doom’, ɛ̔̄́  μαρται ‘it is fated’;
pres. καίɛ¯ν ‘to be burning (something), to burn severally’ < ∗καίϝɛ¯ν < ∗καϝ-jε-,
cf. Hom., Att. καυμα˜ ‘burning heat’.
When preceded by ∗ e, ∗i, or ∗u the clusters ∗ny and ∗ry also underwent the assim-
ilation to ∗[nʲ:] and ∗[rʲ:], but subsequently ∗[nʲ:] and ∗[rʲ:] were depalatalized and
developed exactly like ∗Rh- and ∗hR-clusters in at least most dialects; their devel-
opment will be treated in 5.2.2, where possible exceptions and the outcome of ∗ ewy
will also be discussed.
The clusters ∗ py and ∗ pʰy both appear in all dialects as πτ. Such an outcome
can only be the result of a sequence of sound changes. The penultimate stage must
have been ∗pʧ, as in Old Provençal subjunctive 3sg. sapcha ‘that (s)he may know’
< ∗sapja (cf. Spanish sepa) < Lat. sapiat ‘that (s)he may be wise’ (Janko 1977); the
palatal semivowel must first have been devoiced by the preceding consonant and
must then have developed into a fricative, which then developed into an affricate,
ultimately to be deaffricated to τ. One example is root-internal:
PIE ∗pyah₂k- ‘beat’ (Toch. B pyāktsi ‘to pound in’, Hackstein 1992) > ∗πʧᾱκ- >
πτᾱκ- in Dor. πτα ̄́σσɛ¯ν, Ion. πτήσσɛ¯ν ‘to cower’.
There are at least five inherited present stems in ∗-ye/o-:
PIE ∗klép-ye/o- ‘be stealing’ (Toch. B inf. ka¨lypītsi) > ∗κλεπʧε/ο- > κλέπτɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₁rép-ye/o- ‘be snatching’ (Lat. rapere with remodeled root) > ∗ἐρεπʧε/ο-
> Hom. ἐρεπτομενος´ ‘devouring’;
PIE ∗spéḱ-ye/o- ‘be looking’ (Lat. inf. conspˉ icere, Skt 3sg. pá´sy ati ‘(s)he sees’)
>→ ∗sképye/o- > ∗σκεπʧε/ο- > σκέπτεσθαι;


===== PDF PAGE 172 =====
162 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
PIE ∗kh₂p-ié/ó- ‘be grabbing’ (Lat. capere ‘to take’, OE hebban ‘to lift’) >→
∗kapyé/ó- > ∗καπʧε/ο- > κάπτɛ¯ν ‘to gulp down’;
PIE ∗ gʷh₂bʰ-ié/ó- ‘be dipping in water’ (ON kvefja) >→ ∗ gʷapʰyé/ó- >
∗γʷαπʧε/ο- > βάπτɛ¯ν.
A few others were constructed to roots that might have been inherited, e.g.:
PIE ∗dʰrubʰ- ‘break up’ (?; cf. Latvian pl. drubazas ‘splinters’?) > ∗tʰrupʰ- in
pres. ∗tʰrupʰ-yé/ó- > ∗θρυπʧε/ο- > θρύπτɛ¯ν (cf. aor. passive τρυφῆναι);
pre-Gk ∗tʰapʰ- ‘bury’ (< ∗dʰm ̥bʰ-, cf. Arm. damban ‘grave’?; so LIV
s.v. 2.∗dʰembʰ, but only the zero grade of this root is attested anywhere) in
pres. ∗tʰapʰ-yé/ó- > ∗θαπʧε/ο- > θάπτɛ¯ν (cf. aor. passive ταφῆναι).
There is indirect evidence that the entire sequence of sound changes had run its
course by the Mycenaean period. The Linear B syllabary includes a sign for pte,
its value guaranteed by multiple attestations of ra-pte, nom. pl. ra-pte-re, etc. =
∗ῥαπτήρ ‘stitcher, tailor’, with derived fem. nom. pl. ra-pi-ti-ra₂ = ῥάπτριαι, the
latter actually attested in 1st-millennium Greek (Aura Jorro 1999 s.vv.). That is the
only sign in the syllabary that writes a sequence of two stops, but there are several
signs that write sequences of consonant plus semivowel. It is reasonable to infer
that at the time the syllabary was created the value of the sign was ∗ pye (Palmer
apud Janko 1977); if that is true, ∗py had certainly become pt by the Mycenaean
period.
The sound-change outcome of ∗by is undiscoverable. There are two presents
in -πτε/ο- to roots ending in β, namely βλάπτɛ¯ν ‘to harm’ (cf. noun βλάβη) and
καλύπτɛ¯ν ‘to cover’ (cf. καλύβη ‘hut’), but both could have been backformed from
the corresponding sigmatic aorists. I can find no other potential examples.
The development of ∗k(ʰ)y and ∗t(ʰ)y clusters has been treated most recently by
Kostopoulos forthcoming (a), on which the following discussion partly depends.
The outcome of the clusters ∗ky and ∗kʰy differs from dialect to dialect. Most
dialects exhibit σσ; Attic, West Ionic, Boiotian, and Cretan exhibit ττ (variously
spelled in Cretan inscriptions; Lejeune 1972: 106). The distribution of the out-
come ττ over a compact area including Attica and the regions immediately to the
north is a striking areal feature cutting across older dialect divisions; it suggests
very strongly that the difference between σσ and ττ is the result of recent changes
that might have spread from dialect to dialect, and that the Proto-Greek state of
development was at most ∗tʦ, more likely ∗tʧ (see further below). That is corrobo-
rated by the use of a special symbol for this cluster in early East Ionic inscriptions,
typically varying with σσ in all but the earliest (cf. DGE 701, 707, 710, 732, 744). In
addition to the examples of ∗ky < ∗kʷy (for which, see 3.4.3) and a large number of
comparatives which must have been formed within Greek (for which, see 3.6.1),
there is a present in ∗-ye/o- made to an inherited root:


===== PDF PAGE 173 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 163
PIE ∗pyah₂k- ‘beat’ (Toch. B pyāktsi ‘to pound in’, Hackstein 1992) > ∗πʧᾱκ- >
πτᾱκ- in Dor. πτᾱ́ σσɛ¯ν, Ion. πτήσσɛ¯ν ‘to cower’.
There are also several archaic present stems formed directly to consonant-stem
nouns and adjectives with the inherited denominative suffix ∗-yé/ó-, as well as
some other derived presents and some isolated nouns and adjectives:
φυλάσσɛ¯ν, Att. φυλάττɛ¯ν ‘to guard’ < ∗φυλακ-jε/ο-, cf. φύλακ- ‘(a) guard’;
κηρʋ̄́ σσɛ¯ν, Att. κηρʋ̄́ ττɛ¯ν ‘to announce, to proclaim’ < ∗κηρῡκ-jε/ο-, cf. κήρῡκ-
‘herald’;
Hom. ἑλισσέμεν ‘to whirl, to coil’, Att. ἑλίττɛ¯ν ‘to roll’ < ∗hελικ-jε/ο-, cf. ἕλικ-
‘spiral’;
πτύσσɛ¯ν ‘to fold’ < ∗πτυχ-jε/ο-, cf. Hom. πτύχες ‘folds, layers’;
ὀρύσσɛ¯ν, Att. ὀρύττɛ¯ν ‘to dig’ < ∗ὀρυχ-jε/ο-, cf. δι- ´ωρυχ- ‘trench, canal’ (possibly
deverbative, but early enough to preserve the original root-final consonant);
μαλάσσɛ¯ν, Att. μαλάττɛ¯ν ‘to soften’, deriv. of μαλακος´ ‘soft’;
ταράσσɛ¯ν, Att. ταράττɛ¯ν ‘to disturb’, deriv. of ταραχή ‘uproar’;
πίσσα, Att. πίττα ‘pitch’ < ∗πίκjα, cf. Lat. pic-;
δισσ´ος,  Att. διττ´ος  ‘twofold’ < ∗διχj´ος, cf. δίχα ‘in two, apart’.
In word-initial position geminate consonants did not normally occur in Greek,
and that explains why the outcome of these clusters was different word-initially
(Kostopoulos, op. cit.):
σᾱ́ μερον, Ion. σήμερον, Att. τήμερον ‘today’ < ∗κj-ᾱ́ μερο-, cf. Hitt. kī neut. ‘this’,
Lat. cis ‘on this side’, etc., and Hom. ἦμαρ, Att. ἡμέρᾱ, Doric, etc., ᾱ̓ μέρᾱ ‘day’;
σᾶτες, Ion. σῆτες, Att. τῆτες, Myc. za-we-te ‘this year’ < ∗κjά̄ -ϝετες, formed by
lexical analogy with the preceding to PIE endingless loc. ∗wétes ‘in a year’;
Hom. σεύεσθαι ‘to rush’ < PIE ∗kʷyew-, cf. Skt cyávate ‘it moves’.
The last example occurs mostly in verse, but a compound derivative πανσυδί ‘with
all speed’ is also attested in Attic prose, and Kostopolous (op. cit.) cites an early
Cretan equivalent παν]σεϝδί, as well as Boiotian σᾱ́ ετες ‘this year’. It seems clear
that geminate ∗tʧ and word-initial ∗ʧ did not always develop in parallel in a given
dialect; Kostopoulos suggests, reasonably, that dialects in which the outcome was
σ- experienced an early merger of the reflexes of ∗k(ʰ)y and ∗t(ʰ)y. Mycenaean
spells the outcome of the former with the z-signs, to judge from za-we-te and nom.
pl. ka-zo-e ‘inferior’ < ∗κάκ-yοh-; cf. κακος´ ‘bad’.
The development of ∗ty and ∗tʰy presents the same sort of dichotomy as the
development of ∗hy (see 3.5.1). When there is a morpheme boundary between the
consonants and a vowel immediately precedes, we observe the same outcomes as
for ∗ky and ∗kʰy. Secure examples include:


===== PDF PAGE 174 =====
164 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
πάσσɛ¯ν, Att. πάττɛ¯ν ‘to sprinkle’ < (?) PIE ∗kʷát-ye/o-, cf. Lat. quatere ‘to
shake’;⁴⁸
βλίσσɛ¯ν, Att. βλίττɛ¯ν ‘to harvest honey’ < ∗mlit-yé/ó-, cf. μέλιτ- ‘honey’; the
zero grade of the base induced by the accented suffix demonstrates that this
is an old derivative;
νῆσσα, Att. νῆττα ‘duck’ < ∗νά̄ τ-jα < ∗ n ̥h₂t-, cf. Skt ātı´s, etc.;
Hom. ἐρεσσέμεναι ‘to row’ < ∗ἐρετ-jε/ο-, cf. ἐρετμον´ ‘oar’;
Hom. λίσσεσθαι ‘to beg, to entreat’ < ∗λιτ-jε/ο-, cf. aor. λιτέσθαι;
Hom., etc., κρέσσων ‘more powerful; better’ ←< pre-Gk ∗krét-yos-, cf. κρατύς
‘powerful’; Att. κρɛ̄́ ττων has a lengthened vowel, on which, see now
Kostopoulos forthcoming (b);
Arkadian ἔασσα fem. ‘being’ < ∗ἐhąτ-jα < ∗h₁sn ̥tı´h₂ (Skt satι ̄́) ← PIE ∗h₁sóntih₂;
adj. suffix -(ϝ)εντ- ‘having …’, fem. -(ϝ)εσσα, Boiot. -ϝεττα < ∗-ϝετ-jα ← ∗-ϝąτ-jα
< post-PIE ∗ -wn ̥t-ih₂, cf. Skt -vat-ī;
Hom. ipf. κορύσσετο ‘he was putting on his helmet’ < ∗κορυθ-jε/ο-, cf. κορυθ´-
‘helmet’;
πυρέσσɛ¯ν, Att. πυρέττɛ¯ν ‘to have a fever’ < ∗πυρετ-jε/ο-, cf. πυρετος´ ‘burning
heat, fever’.
(There are also some more obscure examples; see Lejeune 1972: 103.) The root
of the last example has been reanalyzed as πυρεκ- (aor. πυρέξαι, etc.) because the
present stem—no doubt the stem most frequently used, since the verb is naturally
imperfective—is ambiguous (see 5.4.2).
However, in all dialects ∗ty and ∗tʰy appear as single σ after ν or a diphthong;
typical are:
πᾶσα fem. ‘all’ < πάνσα (attested in Arkadian, Thessalian, Argolic, and Cretan)
< ∗πάντjα, cf. masc./neut. παντ-;
pres. ptc. suffix fem. -οσαˉ < -ονσα (attested in Arkadian, Argolic, and Cretan)
< ∗-οντjα, cf. masc./neut. -οντ-.
The few word-initial examples likewise exhibit a reflex σ- in all dialects:
PIE ∗tyegʷ- ‘retreat’ vel sim. (Skt tyájati ‘(s)he abandons’) > σέβεσθαι ‘to be
ashamed’, later ‘to reverence, to do homage to’;
PIE ∗dʰyah - ‘indicate’₂ vel sim. (Skt dʰyā-‘think’) in ∗tʰyamn ̄́ ̥‘indication’ >
σᾶμα > Att.-Ion. σῆμα ‘sign, marker’.
Evidently the cluster was not geminate in these positions (Kostopoulos, op. cit.).
⁴⁸ I prefer this simple and obvious etymology to the speculative connections posited in LIV s.v.
∗(s)ku ̯eh₁t.


===== PDF PAGE 175 =====
3.6 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PIE ∗Y 165
Since the outcomes of these clusters clearly merged with those of dental plus ∗ s
(see 3.7), it is tempting to suggest that ∗ty and ∗tʰy were at first affricated to ∗(t)ʦ,
unlike of ∗ky and ∗kʰy (see above). However, the reflex of ∗ty after ∗r shows that
that cannot be correct:
PIE ∗wert- ‘turn’ (3sg. Skt vártate, Lat. vertitur) → ∗wért-ye/o- > ∗wérʧe/o- >
∗wérʃe/o- > ἔρρɛ¯ν ‘to go away (badly / to a bad place)’ (Forssman 1980: 186–
98);
pre-Gk ∗krét-yos- ‘more powerful’ (see above) → pre-Doric ∗kárt-yon- >
∗kárʃon- > κάρρων Alkman 105.
We saw above (in 3.5.1) that the inherited cluster ∗ rs survived intact when the
accent immediately preceded. It follows that these words could never have passed
through a stage in which they exhibited ∗rs; their development must have been
diverted, so to speak, before it would have reached that point. It follows further
that the majority development of the clusters in question was ∗t(ʰ)y > ∗(t)ʧ > ∗(t)ʦ,
followed by divergent further development in the dialects. On the other hand,
Kostopoulos’ suggestion that the development of ∗t(ʰ)y was at every time ‘ahead
of ’ ∗k(ʰ)y is very likely to be true.
As adumbrated above, there is a further wrinkle. When there is no morpheme
boundary between the consonants the outcome is different in Attic-Ionic and
Arkadian (and presumably Cypriote and Mycenaean, though the syllabaries do
not permit firm inferences on this point). The examples are the following.
PIE ∗médʰyos ‘middle’ (Skt mádʰyas, Lat. medius) > ∗μέθjος > Att.-Ion., Ark.
μέσος but Lesb., Heraklean, Argolic μέσσος, Boiot., Cret. μέττος; cf. Myc.
me-sa-to ‘of middling quality’;
PIE ∗kʷóti ‘how many?’ (Skt káti, Lat. quot), ∗tóti ‘that many’ (Lat. tot), ∗Hyóti
‘as many as’, thematized as ∗κʷοτjος,´  ∗τ´οτjος,  ∗h´οτjος  > Att.-Ion. π´οσος,
τ´οσος, ὅσος, Ark. ὅσος, Myc. to-so, but Lesb. ὄσσος, Delphian, etc. ὅσσος,
Cret. ὄττος;
PIE ∗próti ‘toward, against’ (Skt práti), deriv. ∗prótyoˉ ‘forward’ > Att.-Ion.
πρ´οσω, to which ὀπίσω ‘backward’ was formed.
In Homer these words vary between -σ- and -σσ-, whereas words of the preceding
class do not.
The examples without an intervening morpheme boundary strongly suggest
that σ is the regular sound-change outcome in South Greek, and that the examples
with a geminate have been remodeled in some way. Since the geminate exam-
ples exhibit ττ in Attic, that remodeling must have occurred at a stage when the
reflex of these clusters was still an affricate. How to reconcile that conclusion with
the Homeric variation σσ ~ σ remains unclear, but it seems at least possible that


===== PDF PAGE 176 =====
166 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
the Homeric forms with σσ are Aiolisms. The chronology of developments is also
unclear. The most straightforward interpretation of the pattern would recognize
the split between ∗t(ʰ)+y and ∗t(ʰ)y with no morpheme boundary as the first
change distinguishing the South Greek dialect group from the rest, but the actual
course of development need not have been that simple. For instance, it is possi-
ble that the split occurred in Proto-Greek, ∗t(ʰ)y yielding ∗ʦ, for instance, while
∗t(ʰ)+y was remodeled as ∗ʦy > ∗tʦ, the latter eventually merging with simple ∗ʦ
in the non-South Greek dialects. In the current state of our knowledge it seems
impossible to make more detailed suggestions. In any case it is clear that clus-
ters of dental plus ∗s gave exactly the same outcomes in all dialects (see 3.7); thus
Kostopoulos’ suggestion that the penultimate stage of development was ∗ʦ must
be correct.
Finally, ∗dy and ∗gy eventually appear as ζ, which was clearly /sd/ in Attic-Ionic
(and is actually spelled σδ in our text of Sappho and Alkaios); the development
must have been approximately ∗dy, ∗gy > ∗dʤ > ∗dʣ > [zd]. Some dialects might
not have progressed beyond the penultimate stage; that the letter zeta was used
for /ts/ in Etruscan suggests that it was pronounced [dz] or the like in some
dialect(s) of Magna Graecia. In Thessalian, Boiotian, Elean, and Cretan we find
δδ, which could reflect assimilation either of [dz] or of [zd]. Several examples are
inherited:
PIE nom. sg. ∗dyḗws or ∗dyéws ‘sky, day’ (Skt dyáus) > Ζεύς;
(post-)PIE ∗pedyós ‘foot-, of feet’ (cf. Lat. ped-‘foot’, etc.) > πεζος´ ‘on foot’;
PIE ∗méǵ-yos- ‘bigger, greater’ (Av. neut. maziioˉ; remodeled in Lat. neut.
maius) > ∗μέζοh- in Myc. nom. pl. me-zo-e, neut. me-zo-a₂; → μέζων (see
5.4.2; Att. μɛ ̄́ζων, see Kostopoulos forthcoming (b));
PIE ∗néygʷ- ~ ∗nigʷ- ‘wash’ (Skt pres. 3sg. mid. nenikté), pres. ∗nigʷ-yé/ó- (OIr.
3sg. nigid) > ∗νιγjε/ο- > νίζɛ¯ν.
Others are derivatives of inherited roots:
PIE ∗ǵʰed- ‘defecate’ (Skt pres. 3sg. hadati) in pres. ∗χεδ-jε/ο- > χέζɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h od- ‘smell’₃ (cf. Lat. noun odor) in pres. ∗ὀδ-jε/ο- > ὄζɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂tug- ‘frightful’ (Hitt. hatugis) in denom. ∗ἀτυγ-jε/ο- > Hom. ἀτύζεσθαι
‘to be scared witless’ (cf. Benveniste 1937);
PIE ∗stag- ‘drip’ (cf. σταγ ων´ ‘drop’, Lat. stagnum ‘pool’) in pres. ∗σταγ-jε/ο- >
στάζɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗stig- ‘pierce’ (OE stician) in pres. ∗στιγ-jε/ο- > στίζɛ¯ν ‘to tattoo’.
Still others can be recognized from their relations to other Greek stems or
words, e.g.:


===== PDF PAGE 177 =====
3.7 OTHER CLUSTERS OF DENTAL STOPS 167
pre-Gk pres. ∗slagʷ-yé/ó- ‘seize (severally), be catching’ > ∗hλαγ-jε/ο- > Hom.
λάζεσθαι, aor. ∗hλαγʷ-ε/ο- > λαβɛ˜ν;
φράζεσθαι ‘to think about, to ponder’ < ∗φραδ-jε/ο-, cf. Hom. φράδμων ‘wise’,
etc.;
παίζɛ¯ν ‘to play’ < ∗παϝιδ-jε/ο-, cf. Hom. παϊδ- ‘child’;
ἁρπάζɛ¯ν ‘to snatch’ < ∗hαρπαγ-jε/ο-, cf. ἅρπαγ- ‘seizure, robbery’;
σφάζɛ¯ν ‘to slaughter’ < ∗σφαγ-jε/ο-, cf. noun σφαγή.
The class of present tenses created by this sequence of sound changes partici-
pated in extensive remodeling. On the one hand, because presents in -ζ- could
reflect roots in -δ- or in -γ- they often acquired unetymological sigmatic stems;
for instance, the Attic aorist of ἁρπάζɛ¯ν is ἁρπάσαι instead of expected ἁρπάξαι
(attested in Pindar), while in West Greek dialects the aorist of δικάζɛ¯ν ‘judge’ is
usually δικάξαι (Attic-Ionic δικάσαι). On the other hand, because sigmatic stems
in -ξ- might reflect an underlying voiced or voiceless root-final velar, presents in
-σσ-/-ττ- have spread widely at the expense of those in -ζ-; for instance, ‘to arrange,
to marshall (troops)’ is everywhere τάσσɛ¯ν or τάττɛ¯ν (with whatever infinitive
ending is normal in the relevant dialect), even though all the derivatives show that
the root is ταγ-.
The sequence of sound changes that eventually yielded /sd/ permits a limited
inference about the inflection of one lexeme. The reduplication of Hom. δίζηαι
‘you seek’, διζήμενος ‘seeking’ makes sense only if the root was still ∗δjᾱ-, at least
underlyingly; it follows that that present stem must have been in existence before
this sequence of sound changes had progressed very far.
3.7 Other clusters of dental stops
Some other clusters of dental stops yielded eventual outcomes similar to those of
∗t(ʰ)y; for that reason this is a convenient point at which to discuss them.
Of the examples of ∗tw that have been suggested, only four are beyond serious
question. Two are word-initial:
PIE ∗twé ‘you’ (acc. sg., accented) > ∗ʦϝέ > σέ;
PIE ∗tweys- ‘shake’ (cf. Skt atviṣanta ‘they have been inflamed’ RV VIII.94.7
with zero- grade root) in pres. ∗twéys-e/o- > ∗ʦϝέjhε/ο- > σείɛ¯ν.
Whether σ- was the outcome in all dialects is unclear. Both σέ and σείɛ¯ν occur in
literary documents of all dialects; I have not found either in inscriptions. Literary
Doric also has 2sg. pronoun forms beginning with τ-, but those could reflect PIE


===== PDF PAGE 178 =====
168 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
enclitic ∗te, or even leveling from nom. sg. τύ (the reverse of the leveling in Attic-
Ionic). The two word-internal examples do exhibit different outcomes in different
dialects:
PIE ∗kʷetwóres masc. ‘four’ (Skt catvā́ ras) >→ ∗κʷέʦϝVρες > Boiot. πέτταρες,
Att. τέτταρες, Ion., Ark. τέσσερες, Lesb. πέσσυρες (but West Greek τέτορες
has lost the ∗w, possibly by leveling from τέταρτος ‘fourth’, which has lost it
in all dialects);
PIE ∗sēmi- ‘half-’ (Lat. sēmi-) > ἡμι-, derived noun ∗ἥμιτυς (Att.-Ion. ἥμισυς,
also used as an adj.) thematized as ∗ἥμιτϝο- in Ark., Delphian, etc., noun
ἥμισσον, Boiot. εἵμιττον.⁴⁹
In these cases the outcomes are identical with those of ∗t(ʰ)+y; it therefore seems
reasonable to posit a development ∗tw > ∗ʦw > Proto-Greek ∗tʦ, with simpli-
fication of the geminate in word-initial position (so Kostopoulos forthcoming
(a)).
Most of the examples of ∗θϝ which have been claimed are doubtful; for instance,
it is not at all clear that the root of θανɛ˜ν ‘to die’ is cognate with that of Skt ádʰvanīt
‘it smoked’, nor that ὀρθος´ ‘upright’ is the same word as Skt urdˉʰvás ‘lofty’. How-
ever, the mediopassive 2pl. ending -σθε must ultimately be connected with Skt
-dʰva (yájadʰva ‘you (pl.) sacrifice’ RV VIII.2.37), and at least in that ending the
∗w has been lost without a trace. But since the ending has clearly been remodeled,
it seems best to postpone discussion of it until 4.2.6.
Finally, clusters of dental stop plus ∗s exhibit the same outcomes as ∗t(ʰ)y with
no internal morpheme boundary—strikingly, as there was always a morpheme
boundary between the dental stop and the ∗s. In word-final position the outcome
is -ς in all dialects (just as ∗t(ʰ)y yields word-initial σ- in all dialects); non-neuter
nom. sg. forms of stems ending in dental stops provide virtually all the examples.
After consonants the outcome is likewise -σ- everywhere, e.g.:
dat. pl. ∗πάντ-σι ‘to all’ > Ark. πάνσι, Myc. pa-si, Att.-Ion., etc. πᾶσι;
dat. pl. ∗ἑλοντ-σι´  ‘to those who have taken’ > Cret. ἐλονσι,´  Att.-Ion., etc., ἑλõσι.
After long vocalic nuclei the outcome is likewise -σ-, e.g.:
dat. pl. ∗πάϝιδ-σι ‘to children’ > ∗παῖσι → παισί with analogical shift of accent;
onomastic element ∗Πειθ-σι- ‘persuading’ > Πεισι- > Lakonian Πειhι-.
After short vowels there are numerous examples among sigmatic aorists and
futures; Attic-Ionic and Arkadian exhibit single -σ- (varying with -σσ- in our text
of Homer), Boiotian and Cretan geminate -ττ-, and the remaining dialects -σσ-.
The following examples are typical:
⁴⁹ PGk η became /e:/ in Boiotian; when the Ionic alphabet was adopted it was spelled ει
(Buck 1955: 25).


===== PDF PAGE 179 =====
3.8 ACCENT IN PROTO-GREEK 169
aor. ∗δατ-σα- ‘divide’ (pres. Hom. 3pl. δατέονται, Cret. inf. δατɛ˜θθαι) in
Hom. inf. δάσσασθαι ~ δάσασθαι, Ark. δάσασσθαι (DGE 661), but Cret.
ἀποδάτταθθαι;
aor. ∗δικαδ-σα- ‘judge; bring a lawsuit’ (pres. δικάζɛ¯ν) in Att.-Ion. inf. δικάσαι,
Ark. mid. δικάσασθαι (DGE 657, with other examples), but Lesb. 3pl.
κατεδίκασσαν, Argolic opt. 3pl. δικάσσαιεν (DGE 85);
aor. ∗λογιδ-σα- ‘reckon’ (pres. λογίζεσθαι) in inf. Att.-Ion. λογίσασθαι but
Boiot. ἀπολογίτταστη.
This pattern tends to corroborate the inference that -σ- was the regular sound-
change outcome of ∗t(ʰ)y with no internal morpheme boundary in Attic-Ionic
and Arkadian.
3.8 Accent in Proto-Greek
A recent comprehensive account of the development of Ancient Greek accent is
Probert (2006a: 83–96), on which this section principally relies.
Contraction of vowels in hiatus (often after the loss of an intervening laryngeal,
see 3.2.1) seems to have created the Greek contrast between acute and circum-
flex intonations, which did not exist in PIE (Jasanoff 2004: 248):⁵⁰ when the PIE
accent fell on the first vowel the result was a Greek circumflex, contrasting with
the preexisting acute. The clearest examples are nominal endings:
PIE gen. pl. ∗-óHom and thematic ∗-ó-oHom > -ῶν;
PIE thematic dat. sg. ∗-ó-ey > -ῶι, and ah₂-stem ∗-áh₂-ay > -ᾶι (> -ῆι)
PIE gen. sg. ∗-áh₂-s → (?) ∗-áh₂-as > -ᾶς (> -ῆς).
Contrast, e.g., PIE ∗ph₂tḗr ‘father’ > πατήρ, post-PIE ∗bʰoh₂náh₂ ‘voice’ > φωνᾱ́
(> φωνή), etc. This became (at least part of ) the basis of a rule assigning cir-
cumflex accent to accented genitive and dative endings containing long vowels
or diphthongs, e.g. in thematic dat. pl. -οῖς ←< PIE inst. pl. ∗-ṓys (cf. Jasanoff 2004:
248 fn. 2); thus the α-stem gen. sg. ending is an uncertain example, since it could
reflex ∗-áh₂-s as modified by the new rule.
The ‘law of limitation’, according to which the accent can fall only on one of the
last three syllables of a word (or the last two, if the final syllable is long for accentual
purposes), operates in all Ancient Greek dialects, so far as we can tell, and is thus
probably a Proto-Greek innovation (Probert 2006a: 84–5 with references); that
such a rule spread through a dialect network without being modified or acquiring
exceptions does not seem likely. It was certainly in operation before quantitative
⁵⁰ However, it is not clear to me that all vowel sequences not originally interrupted by a laryngeal had
already been contracted into long vowels in PIE (Jasanoff 2004: 247–8). Identical long vowels clearly
had contracted in the thematic subjunctive, but the correspondence between circumflexed thematic
dat. sg. Gk -ῶι and Lith. non-acute -ui strongly suggests that ∗-o-ey was still disyllabic in PIE.


===== PDF PAGE 180 =====
170 THE PHONOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK
metathesis occurred (and therefore before the Homeric poems were composed,
Probert 2006a: 84–5 with references; see 6.2 below), and before the late contrac-
tions of vowels occurred (see 7.2.3). More significantly, it must have been in place
before the loss of word-final stops (see 3.5.3) and before the loss of voiceless dental
stops before -ι noticed by Warren Cowgill (see 3.4.6), since it is precisely word-
final ι-diphthοngs resulting from those changes that are not treated as short by
the accent law. The assignment of the law of limitation to Proto-Greek is therefore
practically certain.
The application of the recessive accent rule to (most) finite forms of Greek verbs,
which must reflect the accentlessness of PIE verbs in main clauses (see 2.2.5), also
appears to be a Proto-Greek innovation (Probert 2006a: 87 with references).
An innovation which is at least pan-Greek, and might be Proto-Greek, is
Wheeler’s Law, which retracted final-syllable accent by one syllable if the word
had the prosodic shapeˉ ˘x (Probert 2006a: 88); a plausibly inherited example is:
ἀγκύλος ‘bent, crooked’ < ∗h₂(a)nkulós (cf. PGmc ∗angulaz ‘fishhook’ > ON
ǫngull, with Verner’s Law voicing showing that the accent was not on the
root-syllable).
However, though Wheeler’s Law apparently operated in all the dialects (Probert
2006a: pp. 95–6), there are numerous lexical exceptions, and though many might
have arisen at a later period (pp. 91–5), it is also possible that Wheeler’s Law
spread through a dialect continuum word by word (or derivational category by
category).⁵¹
In the paradigms of polysyllabic nominals Greek has mostly fixed the accent
on the same syllable in all forms; exceptions are few and are usually (relative)
archaisms. In monosyllables, however, except for participles, alternating accent
actually became productive, so that genitive and dative forms that do not have the
accent on the ending (e.g. πάντων) are the archaisms. Even nouns that became
monosyllabic relatively late have largely adopted alternating accent; for instance, in
Attic ∗ˉοατος῎  gen. ‘ear’s’ (cf. Hom. οὔατος) > ∗ὦτος → ὠτ´ος.  The pattern could have
arisen indefinitely early in the prehistory of Greek, though obviously the details
shifted over time.
3.9 Relative chronology of sound changes
It is clear from the above discussion that the relative chronology of Greek sound
changes can be recovered only in part. Figure 3.1 presents a flow chart that
shows the relative chronologies of changes that can be inferred with greater or
less confidence; because the chart cannot include discussion, it is important to
use it with the text, not by itself. The pattern of relative chronologies is quite
⁵¹ See now also Dieu (2021), who argues that various apparent examples of Wheeler’s Law reflect
other processes. I am grateful to Philomen Probert for the reference.


===== PDF PAGE 181 =====
3.9 REL ATIVE CHRONOLOGY OF SOUND CHANGES 171
different from those that can be inferred between sound changes from PIE to
Proto-Germanic; in that case it was possible to reconstruct chronologies linking
as many as ten sound changes (Ringe 2017: 176), whereas the longest sequences
of changes on the following pages include only four. It is also striking that five
separate relative chronologies converge on Grassmann’s Law.
I have introduced into the chart a horizontal line labeled ‘Mycenaean’ repre-
senting the stage of the language represented in the Linear B tablets, but the line is
not continuous, since the syllabary does not reveal whether some sound changes
had or had not occurred by the Mycenaean period.


===== PDF PAGE 182 =====
©The
 Don Linguisticuniverbation of augment
 Ringe↙↓
 (2024). RootsVHV > VV↙VH > V̄
↓↙↙↘
 DOI: of Ancient↓↙↙↘H > VHV > VRix’s Law n̥Hy > n̥y
 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0003↓↙↙CCy > CC↘↓↓↘↓↙↓
 Greek↓↙↙↓↘↓↓↘↓↙↓
. early   ↙Kwy > Ky↓↘↓↓N̥ > ą(N) R̥ H > RV̄
Donvowel↙↓↓stop assim.↘↓↙↓
 Ringe,
contrct.↙aspirate↓↓↓↘↓↙my > ny
 Oxford↓↙devoicing↓↓↓s > h↓
↓law of ↓ ↓↓↓↓Hy > [j̥]↙↓↘ανj  >  αινKw  >  KwK > K
 University↓limitation↓ ↓↓↓↓↓↙↓↘↘↙
 ↓↓↓↓ ↓Cj > πτ, (t)ʧ↓↓↓↓Cowgill υ
 Press.Osthoff↓↓↓ ↓↓↓↓h-copying↓
↓↙↓↓ ↓↓↓↓↓↓↓
 loss of ↓↓↘↓↓↓↓↓unrndng.
finalV̀τ/θι > Vι↘↘↓↓↓Rh, hR > RR
stops↘↘↓↓↓↓
↓Mycenaean↘↘ — ↘ —[j̥] > h↓  —↓—Mycenaean—
↓↘↓ ↓↓↓1CL
3pl. -αν↓ ↓ ↓?↓
↓ ↓ ↓?↓
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓↙
G r a s s m a n n
↓
Homer
Figure 3.1 Relative chronologies of sound changes


===== PDF PAGE 183 =====
4
The development of Proto-Greek
inflectional morphology
4.1 Introduction
Greek underwent no major restructuring of its inflectional morphology in its
development from PIE. As in all daughters, the system of nominal inflection was
reoriented around stem types defined by their final segment; as in most, it was
simplified somewhat. The verb system underwent modest elaboration with little
loss of inherited material.
It is even harder than in the case of phonological changes to determine which
changes in inflection had occurred by the time the attested dialects began to
diverge; there is little evidence of relative chronology, and thus no way to dis-
tinguish early changes from later parallel developments or developments that
spread from one dialect to another. In practice we are often constrained to
ascribe to Proto-Greek those innovations that appear in all the dialects (including
Mycenaean, so far as it offers evidence).
4.2 Changes in verb inflection
As I noted in 2.3.3 (v), the final development of the PIE derivational aspect system
into an inflectional system marking aspect appears to have occurred in the individ-
ual development of Greek. In all attested dialects of Ancient Greek the paradigm
of a verb is built on a set of stems, of which the most central, the present and aorist,
indicate imperfective and perfective aspect respectively. (That is still true in Mod-
ern Greek.) The inherited perfect still expressed stative aspect in Proto-Greek,
though by the time the Homeric poems were composed it had begun a long and
complex semantic development. In addition, stems expressing future tense had
developed, making the system of stems a hybrid aspect-and-tense system.
Reduplication remained a productive process in the Greek perfect; reduplicated
presents and aorists had become relic categories by the Classical period. Present
stems were normally reduplicated with ι, aorist and perfect stems with ε. Only the
first consonant of a cluster was reduplicated. For the most part these reduplica-
tion rules were inherited from PIE; notable changes were the replacement of the
reduplicating vowel ∗e by ∗i in a few present stems and the reduplication of ∗st-,


===== PDF PAGE 184 =====
174 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
at least, by ∗s- (rather than by the whole cluster). In addition, the complex pattern
of ‘Attic’ reduplication, which will be outlined in 4.2.3 (i), developed. All these
developments could be of PGk date.
In the following sections I will discuss the Greek stem types one by one, closing
with sections on the mood suffixes, the augment, the person-and-number endings,
and participles and infinitives.
4.2.1 The development of present stems
4.2.1 (i) Simple and reduplicated athematic presents
Though Greek preserves fewer athematic root-presents than Sanskrit (and many
fewer than Hittite), more than twenty survive to be attested in the Homeric poems,
and ten are still in use in Classical Attic. Clearly inherited examples include the
following; I cite the indicative 3sg. (active, unless the verb is deponent), since that
is the form most easily comparable between daughters.
PIE ∗h₁esti ‘(s)he is’ (Hitt. ēszi, Skt asti, Lat. est, Goth. ist) > ἐστι;
PIE ∗bʰah₂ti ‘it shines, it illuminates’ (Skt bʰāti) → ‘(s)he makes clear’ → ‘(s)he
says’ (cf. Lat. fātur) > φᾱτι > Att.-Ion. φησι;
PIE ∗h₁éyti ‘(s)he is going/walking’ (Skt éti, Lat. it) > εἶτι (preserved e.g. in
Kyrenaian, Buck 115.57) > Att.-Ion. εἶσι;
PIE ∗h₂wḗh₁ti ‘(wind) is blowing’ (Skt vā́ ti) > Hom. ἄησι;
PIE ∗tḱéyti ‘(s)he settles’, pres. 3pl. ∗tḱiénti (Skt 3sg. kṣéti, 3pl. kṣiyánti, Av. šaēiti,
šiieiṇti) > Myc. 3pl. ki-ti-je-si ∗κτιjένσι, Hom. ptc. ἐϋκτίμενος ‘well settled’;
PIE ∗h₁ḗdsti ‘(s)he is eating’ ~ ∗h₁ed- (Hitt. ēz’zi, Skt átti) in Hom. inf. ἔδμεναι
‘to eat’;
PIE ∗ḱéyor ‘(s)he is lying down’ (Luvian ziyar) → ∗ḱéytoy (Skt ´séte) >→ κεῖται;
PIE ∗ḗsor ‘(s)he is sitting down’ (Hitt. esa) → ∗ḗstoy (Skt ā́ ste) >→ Hom. ἧσται;
PIE ∗stéwor ‘(s)he is well known’ (cf. Hitt. istuāri ‘it becomes clear’ with shifted
accent, Skt stáve ‘(s)he is praised’ with innovative ∗-oy) >→ Hom. στε˜υται
‘(s)he boasts’;
PIE ∗wésto ‘(s)he was wearing’ (cf. Hitt. wēstat, Skt ávasta) >→ Hom. ἕστο;
PIE ∗h₂aǵ- ‘say’ (Arm. thematized asê, with s < ∗ḱ < ∗ǵ before 3sg. ∗-ti revealing
original athematic inflection; derived press. Lat. ait ‘(s)he affirms’, Toch. B
subj. ākṣa¨ṃ ‘(s)he will proclaim’) in augmented ipf. 3sg. ∗é h₂aǵ-t ‘(s)he said’
> ∗ἆκτ > Att. quotative ἦ.
φάναι ‘to say’ and ἰέναι ‘to go’ have preserved their ablaut alternations; in ɛ˜̓ναι ‘to
be’ and Hom. ἀήμεναι ‘to blow’ the inherited alternations have been eliminated
by regular sound change, since both ∗ēh₁ and ∗eh₁ yielded η, while both ∗h₁es-
and ∗h₁s- yielded ἐσ- ~ ∗hεh- → ∗ἐh-. The Homeric poems preserve traces of a


===== PDF PAGE 185 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 175
couple of other examples. A probable athematic subjunctive Hom. ἐρείομεν ‘let’s
ask’ Il. 1.62 was adduced in 3.2.2. Much more numerous are forms of δέχθαι ‘to
receive’, which might be attested also in Mycenaean (de-ko-to = Hom. δέκτο?—
but see the discussion of Aura Jorro 1999 s.v.). Most are past indicative or non-
finite and so could be aorists, but δέχαται Il. 12.147 is clearly a present, and the
generalization of -χ- in athematic 3pl. forms neatly explains the unetymological
-χ- of Att. present δέχεσθαι (non-Attic δέκεσθαι, cf. Lat. decēre ‘to be acceptable;
so Chantraine 1973: 296–7).¹ An example attested from an outlying dialect is:
PIE ∗grés- (∗grás-?) ~ ∗ gr̥ s- ‘eat’ vel sim. (cf. Skt 3sg. grásate ‘(s)he swallows’,
thematized), iptv. 2sg ∗ gr̥ sdʰ´ı  > Cyprianka-ra-si-ti ∗γράσθι ‘eat!’ (Masson
264.1, LIV s.v. ∗ gres).
Greek also has a conspicuous group of middle root-presents of the shape (C)V˘ CV˘-.
Their prehistories are not entirely clear, because none has a stem-cognate in any
other branch of the family; even the roots of ἄγασθαι ‘to be astonished’ and
ἔρασθαι ‘to love’ cannot be provided with convincing etymologies. At least the
following are probably inherited:
PIE ∗ḱremh₂- ‘be limp’ vel sim. (cf. Skt ´sramat ‘it will tire’, RV II.30.7) in pres.
κρέμαται ‘it is hanging’; conceivably this stem was constructed by lexical
analogy with ‘lie’ and ‘sit’ (see above), but in that case the innovation must
have been very early, since there is also an archaic transitive or causative
nasal-infixed present (see 4.2.1 (ii));
PIE ∗deyh₂- ‘shine’ (cf. Skt pf. dīdā́ ya) in Hom. ipf. δέατ’ ‘he seemed’ Od. 6.242
and Ark. subj. δέᾱτοι ‘(if / however much) it seems’, DGE 656.10, 18.
On these two stems, see LIV s.vv. ∗k̑ remh₂, ∗dei̯h₂; on Hom. δίενται ‘they are rush-
ing’ Il. 23.475 and ὄνοσαι ‘you object’ Od. 17.378, which seem to me to be more
problematic, see LIV s.vv. ∗dei̯h₁, ∗h₂neh₃. On the tangle of forms surrounding
Hom. ἔρυσθαι ‘to draw out; to ward off ’, see Chantraine (1973: 294–5) and espe-
cially Hackstein (2002a: 83, 123–8); on Hom. ἱ̄́ετο ‘he strove’, which might in part
be reduplicated, Chantraine (1973: 293–4), Frisk s.v. ἵεμαι, and LIV s.v. 1. u̯ ei̯h₁.
How ἐπίστασθαι ‘to understand’, a transparent compound of στα- ‘stand’, got
attracted into this class remains unclear; the early loss of the reduplicating syllable
∗hι- posited by Wackernagel (1895: 20–1) (in support of an incorrect etymology
of αὐτ´ος!) is unmotivated.
¹ The recognition that Hom. δέκτο, etc., are imperfects eliminates the putative evidence for a root-
aorist made to this root, pace LIV s.v. ∗dek ̑. That Arm. etes ‘(s)he saw’ is synchronically an aorist proves
nothing; after all, so is eber ‘(s)he brought’, obviously a cognate of ipf. ἔφερε ‘(s)he carried’. So far as I
can see, there is no unimpeachable evidence for PIE unaffixed presents and aorists made to the same
root; see Ringe (2012) for further discussion.


===== PDF PAGE 186 =====
176 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
Reduplicated athematic presents are also comparatively well represented in
Greek. The reduplicating vowel -ι- has been generalized in this group, replacing
∗-ε- in two or three common verbs. The following are clearly inherited:
PIE ∗h₁´hı ₁yeh₁ti ‘(s)he is making’ (possibly reflected in Hitt. iezzi) > ∗ἰ̄́jητι >→
Att. ἱ̄́ησι ‘(s)he is sending’, with rough breathing leveled in from aor. ἡκ- ~ ἑ-
←< ∗h₁yeh₁-(Peters 1976);
PIE ∗dʰédʰeh₁ti ‘(s)he is putting’ (Skt dádʰāti) >→ τίθητι > Att.-Ion. τίθησι;
PIE ∗dédoh₃ti ‘(s)he is giving’ (Skt dádāti) >→ δίδωτι > Att.-Ion. δίδωσι;
PIE ∗stı´stah₂ti ‘(s)he is standing up’ (thematized in Skt tı´ṣṭʰati, Lat. sistit) >
(trans.) ἵστᾱτι > Att.-Ion. ἵστησι;
PIE ∗ gʷ´gı ʷah₂ti ‘(s)he steps (repeatedly), (s)he strides’ (Skt jı´gāti ‘(s)he goes’),
zero-grade stem ∗ gʷ´gı ʷh₂- > βιβα- in Hom. ptc. μακρὰ βιβᾱ́ ς ‘taking long
strides’;
PIE ∗ǵʰ´ǵı ʰeh₁- (∗ gʰ? meaning? cf. Skt jáhāti ‘(s)he leaves (it)’ and jı´hīte ‘(s)he
moves’, and see LIV s.vv. ∗ g̑ ʰeH, ∗ g̑ ʰeh₁, and ∗ gʰeh₁) in Hom. κιχήμεναι ‘to
come upon, to overtake, to find’.
Possibly inherited is πιμπλη- ~ πιμπλα- ‘fill’, but the stem has been remodeled:
the root is PIE ∗pleh₁-, whose zero-grade ∗pl̥h₁- would by regular sound change
yield πλη-, identical with the full grade, while the nasal in the reduplicating syllable
must also an innovation. Hom. iptv. 2sg. ἐμπίπληθι Il. 21.311 could be an archaism
with the original zero grade of the root. The ablaut of the stem has obviously been
remodeled on that of other reduplicated athematic presents, but the source of the
intrusive nasal remains a puzzle; for suggestions, see Schwyzer (1939: 689) and
LIV s.v. ∗pleh₁-, fn. 7 with references. Also obviously remodeled is ὀνίνησι ‘it ben-
efits’, a verb whose proposed non-Greek cognates are doubtful; for suggestions see
LIV s.v. ∗h₃neh₂.
A number of reduplicated athematic presents are clearly innovations. Attic
κιχράναι ‘to furnish, to lend’, Delphian iptv. 3sg. κιχρέτω DGE 324.20, etc., do not
appear before the 4th century BC and are almost certainly backformations to aor.
χρῆσαι (Frisk s.v. κίχρημι). The same process probably underlies Hom. δίδη ‘he
tied them up (separately)’ Il. 11.105 in spite of its early appearance (Frisk s.v. 1.
δέω, Schwyzer 1939: 688). It is possible that Hom. ἱ̄́ληθι ‘be propitious!’ (twice)
was originally a perfect, cognate with Lesb. ἔλλαθι < ∗he-hla-; see the discussion
of Schwyzer (1939: 689) and Frisk s.v. ἱλάσκομαι, both with numerous references.
The prehistory of some other examples cannot be recovered for lack of external
stem-cognates (or even, in some cases, root-cognates). In the case of Hom. δίζηαι
‘you seek’ we can at least say that the reduplicated present was formed when the
root was still ∗δjᾱ- (see 3.6.3 ad fin.).


===== PDF PAGE 187 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 177
4.2.1 (ii) Nasal-affixed presents
As in other daughters of PIE, the class of nasal-infixed presents has been split in
Greek, and its fission products have not all survived equally well. Five inherited
presents with external cognates to roots ending in ∗h₂ survive in Homeric Greek,
though in every case but one the ablaut of the root has been remodeled:
PIE ∗ mr̥ -n-h₂- ‘crush’ vel sim. (Skt iptv. mr̥ ṇīhı´) > Hom. mid. μάρνασθαι ‘to
fight’;
PIE ∗ pr̥ -ná-h₂-ti ‘(s)he sells’ ~ ∗ pr̥ -n-h₂- (OIr. renaid) > ∗παρνα- → Hom.
περνᾱ́ ς ‘selling’, περνάμεν(α) ‘sold’;
PIE ∗dm̥ -ná-h₂-ti ‘(s)he overcomes, (s)he tames’ ~ ∗dm̥ -n-h₂- (OIr. damnaid
‘(s)he ties up; (s)he breaks (a horse)’) > ∗δάνησι ~ ∗δανα- → Hom. δάμνησι
‘(s)he overcomes’, pass. ipf. δάμνατο ‘they (neut. pl.) were overcome’;
PIE ∗k(e)d-ná-h₂-ti ‘(s)he spreads (it) out’ ~ ∗k(e)d-n-h₂- (Toch. B katnaṃ) >→
Hom. διασκιδνᾶσιν ‘they scatter (it)’, κίδναται ‘(dawn) spreads’, ἐσκίδναντο
‘they dispersed’;
PIE ∗pl̥-n-h₂- ‘approach’ (cf. OIr. ad.ella ‘(s)he visits’) >→ Hom. πίλναται ‘(s)he
touches the surface’, προσεπίλνατο ‘it was approaching’.
At least these five examples are Proto-Greek. Several others are highly likely:
PIE ∗ḱérh₂- ~ ∗ḱr̥ h₂- ‘mix’ (cf. Skt ptc. ā́ ´sīrtas ‘mixed’) in pres. ∗ḱr̥ -ná-h₂- ‘be
mixing’ >→ Hom. ipf. κίρνη ‘(s)he mixed’;
PIE ∗ḱrémh₂- ~ ∗ḱrm̥ h₂- ‘be slack’ → ‘hang’ (caus. ∗kromh₂-éye- in Goth. iptv.
2pl. hramjiþ ‘crucify’, pace Frisk s.v. κρεμάννυμι) in pres. ∗krm̥ -n-h₂- >→
κριμνα- in pres. ptc. gen. pl. κριμνάντων ‘while weighing (anchor)’, Pindar
Pythian IV.25;
pre-Gk ∗p(e)th₂- ‘spread’ in ∗p(e)t-n-h₂- >→ Hom. πιτνᾱ́ ς ‘stretching forth’,
πίτναντο ‘they were spread out’.
(More problematic is Hesykhios’ λίναμαι. τρέπομαι, whose meaning (if correctly
transmitted; see Wackernagel 1916: 206 fn. 1) doesn’t fit especially well with OIr.
lenaid ‘(s)he follows’, nor with Skt lināti ‘it fits’, while its form doesn’t match Goth.
aflinnan ‘to depart’ (see Frisk s.v. λιάζομαι).)
Except for the first one listed, which is praesens tantum, the well-attested
presents of this group are associated with sigmatic aorists περασα-, δαμασα-,
(σ)κεδασα-, πελασα-, κερασα-, κρεμασα-, πετασα-, which are plausibly inter-
preted as remodelings of the root-aorists that one would expect to be associated
with nasal-infixed presents (cf. Strunk 1967: 120–2). That raises the question
of how pres. κρέμασθαι ‘to hang (intr.)’ is related to this complex of stems.


===== PDF PAGE 188 =====
178 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
If it is not an innovation (see above), the pair κρεμα-: ∗κριμνᾱ- could be an
extreme archaism, since the nasal-infixed present is effectively the causative of the
root-present, as is normal in Hittite and probably in PIE (see 2.3.3 (i)). But in that
case the reinterpretation of the unaffixed stems as aorists could be yet another
indication that the aspect system was still derivational down into the separate
prehistory of Greek. Without further information it does not seem possible to
decide this question. The generalization of ι in the root-syllables of most of these
presents is clearly an innovation, but its source is uncertain. It might have been
introduced from reduplicating syllables by native learner error (Schwyzer 1939:
695 with references).
A completely fossilized nasal-infixed present is:
PIE ∗du-ná-h₂- ~ ∗du-n-h₂- ‘fit’ (root ∗dewh₂-, cf. Toch. B pres. 3sg. tsweta¨r
(intrans.), Goth. taujan ‘to make’, orig. causative ∗‘to fit together’, Ringe 1996:
31) > passive δύνασθαι ‘to be able’, orig. ∗‘to be fitted for’.
Only the present survives in Greek; so far as we can tell, that could already have
been the Proto-Greek situation. The rest of the paradigm was built to the present
at a later date.
On thematized presents which might originally have belonged to this group see
further below.
There seem to be only two other nasal presents in which -ν- is unarguably an
infix, and one has been thematized:
PIE ∗gah₂u- ‘be glad, rejoice’² (LIV s.v. ∗geh₂u̯ ) in ∗gh₂-n̥ -u- > Hom. pres. 3sg.
γάνυται (Frisk s.v. γάνυμαι);
PIE ∗kwas- ‘kiss’ (Hitt. 3sg. kuaszi, 3pl. kuassanzi) in pres. ∗ku-né-s- >→ κυνɛ˜ν
(LIV s.v. ∗ku̯ as).
A somewhat problematic case is Hom. κῑ́ νυντο ‘they were moving’ and its thema-
tized variant κῑνɛ˜ν. The latter almost certainly reflects ∗…νεϝ-ε/ο-; the sigmatic
aorist κῑνῆσαι, etc., must be later formations, created after the loss of intervocalic
∗ϝ (Frisk s.v. κῑνέω). The problem is the word’s etymology. We might expect it to
be part of the large family of reflexes of PIE ∗kʷyew- ‘move’, in which case the -ν-
would clearly be an infix. The initial κ- is not an insurmountable problem, since
labiovelars were delabialized before ∗y (see 3.4.3) and the resulting ∗k- could have
been leveled through the paradigm. But the long ῑ in all forms of this present is dif-
ficult to account for. Positing a different synonymous root ∗keyH- or the like (LIV
² Or adj. ‘glad’? Cf. Hitt. tēpu-‘little, few’, tepnu-‘make little/few’. The Greek present is not synchron-
ically factitive, but since its inflection is mediopassive it could originally have meant ∗‘be gladdened,
get happy’.


===== PDF PAGE 189 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 179
s.v. ∗kei̯h₂ with references) might or might not be the right solution, but there is
definitely a problem with this verb.
Most Greek presents with a nasal affix are clearly suffixed; that is not surprising,
since in all the most conservative daughters of PIE (including even Hittite) a suffix
∗-néw- ~ ∗-nu- has developed. A substantial group of Gk nasal-suffixed presents
exhibits a suffix -νῡ- ~ -νυ-, with ablaut remodeled on laryngeal-final roots that
had evolved an alternation -V:- ~ -V- (see above). Several such presents might be
inherited, if not from PIE then from an intermediate protolanguage, because they
have apparent cognates in Indo-Iranian or in other daughters:
(post-)PIE ∗pstr̥ -néw- ~ ∗pstr̥ -nu- ‘sneeze’ (Lat. sternuere) > πτάρνυσθαι (aor.
πταρɛ˜ν);
(post-)PIE ∗h₂r̥ -néw- ~ ∗h₂r̥ -nu- ‘take, receive’ (Arm. pres. 3sg. aṙnow) > Hom.
ptc. ἀρνύμενος;
(post-)PIE ∗h₃r̥ -néw- ~ ∗h₃r̥ -nu- ‘rise, raise’ (Skt r̥ ṇóti ‘sets in motion’, at least
in part, cf. LIV s.v. ∗h₃er) > Hom. ὄρνυται ‘it rises’, etc.;
(post-)PIE ∗tn̥ -néw- ~ ∗tn̥ -nu- ‘stretch’ (Skt tanóti) > Hom. τάνυται ‘it is
stretched’;
post-PIE ∗wes-néw- ~ ∗wes-nu- ‘clothe’ (Arm. pres. 3sg. z-genow ‘puts (clothes)
on’) > Hom. ipf. 3sg. κατα-είνυσαν (ει = ɛ¯) ‘they covered’ (Il. 23.135); this
example could be comparatively old, reflecting a causative that replaced PIE
∗woséye/o-;
post-PIE ∗dēḱ-néw- ~ ∗dēḱ-nu- ‘cause to accept’ (?; probably with analogi-
cal lengthened grade, but cf. Skt dā´snóti ‘propitiates’, RV VIII.4.6) > Hom.
∗δηκνύμενος ‘receiving’ (mss. δεικνύμενος, but cf. Frisk s.v. δηδέχαται with
references).
A special problem are the competing presents κτɛ̄́ νɛ¯ν and κτɛ¯νύναι ‘kill’. The latter
looks like a stem-cognate of Skt kṣaṇóti ‘destroys’, attested in the Brahmanas (cf.
Frisk s.v. κτείνω with references, LIV s.v. tken), with analogically adjusted root-
ablaut; yet it appears first in Classical Attic, while the thematic present, which can
only reflect ∗κτεν-jε/ο-, is well attested in Homer and everywhere else (including
Classical Attic). It is not impossible that the present in -νυ- is an Attic archaism,
but absent other evidence it seems prudent to suspend judgment.
A substantial majority of Greek present stems in -νῡ- ~ -νυ- do not have
stem-cognates in other IE languages. Frequently encountered examples include
(cited as Attic infinitives) κατᾱγνύναι ‘to break’ (∗κατα-ϝαγ-), ῥηγνύναι ‘to break’,
πηγνύναι ‘to fix, to fasten’, ζευγνύναι ‘to yoke’, δεικνύναι ‘to show’, ὀμνύναι ‘to
swear’, ζωννύναι ‘to put on a belt’, σβεννύναι ‘to extinguish’, and ἀπ-ολλύναι ‘to
perish’. The geminate sonorants of the last three show that they were created (or
remodeled) well after the Proto-Greek period, since they did not undergo the early
changes of sonorant clusters (see 5.2.2).


===== PDF PAGE 190 =====
180 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
There are also examples that have been thematized. One is attested both as an
athematic and as a thematic stem:
post-PIE ∗kʷi-néw- ~ ∗kʷi-nu- ‘pay, repay’ (LIV s.v. 3. ∗ku̯ei̯ ) > ∗τινευ- ~ ∗τινυ-
→ Hom. τείνυται, Cret. ἀποτεινύτω (root-ablaut leveled in from aor. τεῖσαι,
Schwyzer 1939: 697, LIV 339–40 with fn. 5 and references) and ∗τινϝε/ο- >
Hom. τῑ́ νɛ¯ν, Att. etc. τίνɛ¯ν (see 7.2.2).
Another was mostly thematized directly but is also attested with a thematic
consonantal extension:
post-PIE ∗dʰgʷʰi-néw- ~ ∗dʰgʷʰi-nu- ‘perish’ (LIV 131–3) > ∗χʷθινευ- ~
∗χʷθινυ- → ∗φθινϝε/ο- > Hom. φθῑ́νɛ¯ν, Att. etc. φθίνɛ¯ν; also extended in
Hom. φθινύθɛ¯ν ‘perish’ and ‘destroy’.
A third has no convincing cognates in other IE languages but appears to be old:
Hom. φθᾱ́ νει ‘it gets ahead of, it outpaces’ (twice), Att. etc. φθάνɛ¯ν ‘to anticipate,
to get (somewhere) ahead of ’ < ∗φθανϝε/ο-. Finally, the most interesting example
has been thematized twice, probably originally in different dialects. On the one
hand, the full grade of the stem was thematized, and the result is widely attested:
PIE ∗seyk- ‘arrive, reach (a place)’ in (post?-)PIE pres. ∗sik-néw- ~ ∗sik-nu-
(LIV s.v. ∗sei̯k) >→ ∗hικνεϝ-ε/ο- > ἱκνɛ˜σθαι (twice in the Odyssey; Ionic, Attic,
etc. aor. ἱκέσθαι).
On the other hand, the usual Homeric present reflects thematization of the zero
grade:
∗sik-néw- ~ ∗sik-nu- >→ ∗hikn̥ w-e/o- > ∗hικανϝε/ο- > Hom. ἱκᾱ́ νɛ¯ν.
The same form of the suffix recurs in Hom. κιχᾱ́ νɛ¯ν ‘to find’, but because the stem
is also reduplicated that must be a later innovation.
Two nasal-infixed presents to roots in ∗-y- leveled the full root into the position
before the nasal, yielding presents in ∗-ny- that were then thematized (Warren
Cowgill, p.c. ca. 1978; LIV s.v. ∗k̑ lei̯ with references):
PIE ∗ḱl̥-né-y- ~ ∗ḱl̥-n-y- ‘lean’ → ∗ḱli-né-y- ~ ∗ḱli-n-y- → ∗ḱlinye/o- > Hom., etc.
κλῑ́ νɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗kr̥ -né-y- ~ ∗kr̥ -n-y-³ ‘sift, separate’ ∗kri-né-y- ~ ∗kri-n-y- → ∗krinye/o-
‘distinguish, decide’ > Lesb. ptc. κρινν´ομεναι (Alkaios 130B.17), Pelasgiote
Thess. κρεννέμεν, otherwise κρῑ́νɛ¯ν.
³ At least if Lat. perf. crēvisse owes its vowel to lexical analogy with lēvisse; in any case there is no trace
of ∗h₁ in the Greek or Celtic forms (so Barber 2013: 371–2). For a somewhat different reconstruction,
see LIV s.v. ∗kreh₁(i)̯.


===== PDF PAGE 191 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 181
A considerable number of Greek thematic presents with suffix -(α)νε/ο- exhibit
no certain evidence of any PIE consonant following the ∗-n-. When the root of the
verb is heavy the suffix is consistently -ανε/ο-. Strikingly, most Homeric examples
are obvious innovations, attested only once or a few times and restricted to epic
Greek; typical are ἐκ … ληθάνει ‘it makes (me) forget’ Od. 7.220–1 (beside ἐλήθετο
‘he forgot’, etc.; λήθɛ¯ν thirty-four times) and ἰσχάνɛ¯ν ‘to hold’ four times (beside
ἴσχɛ¯ν fifty-two times, ἔχɛ¯ν 689 times). But two such Homeric stems are more widely
attested:
pre-Greek ∗h₂mert- ‘miss (a mark)’ (cf. Hom. νημερτής, 3.2.3) in aor. ἁμαρτɛ˜ν
‘to miss, to err’ (with zero-grade αρ < ∗ r̥ and apparently /h-/ by lexical
analogy), pres. ἁμαρτάνɛ¯ν (ipf. 3sg. ἡμάρτανε three times in Homer);
Greek ἐχθ- ‘hate’ (see 3.4.4) in aor. ἀπ-εχθέσθαι ‘to incur hatred’, pres. ἀπ-
εχθάνεσθαι (ἀπεχθάνεαι Od. 2.202).
Similar Classical Attic examples—none of which has problem-free external root-
cognates—include:
pre-Greek ∗awisdʰ- ‘perceive’ (?; cf. Skt āvı´s ‘visible, evident’, Lat. audīre ‘to
hear’) in aor. αἰσθέσθαι (cf. ἄϊσθε ‘he breathed out (his life)’, Il. 20.403?),
pres. αἰσθάνεσθαι;
aor. βλαστɛ˜ν ‘to sprout’, pres. βλαστάνɛ¯ν;
aor. κατα-δαρθɛ˜ν ‘to fall asleep’ (Hom. 3sg. ἔδραθε), pres. κατα-δαρθάνɛ¯ν;
aor. ὀλισθɛ˜ν ‘to slip’ (ὄλισθε(ν) Il. twice), pres. ὀλισθάνɛ¯ν.⁴
It seems clear that this suffix was used productively to form presents to thematic
aorists with heavy root-syllables; whether it had already become productive in
Proto-Greek is necessarily unclear. In principle -ανε/ο- could reflect a themati-
zation ∗ -n̥ H-e/o- of a suffix ∗-néH- ~ ∗ -n̥ H- extracted from the infixed presents of
laryngeal-final roots. But -αν- could also reflect just ∗ -n̥ -, the Sievers’ Law alternant
of ∗-n- that is expected after heavy syllables. The few examples of nasal-suffixed
presents to light roots actually suggest as much. Two were made to laryngeal-final
roots:
PIE ∗temh₁- ‘cut’ (LIV s.v.; cf. full grade ∗témh₁- in τέμενος ‘land reserved for
a god’, zero-grade ∗tm̥ h₁tós ‘cut’ in Hom. ἐΰτμητος ‘well-cut’), pres. ∗tm̥ -
né-h₁- ~ ∗tm-n̥ -h₁- (cf. Middle Irish tamnaid), aor. ∗témh₁- ~ ∗tm̥ h₁- >→
aor. τεμɛ˜ν, pres. τάμνɛ¯ν, with root-vowels leveled in the dialects (ε in Attic,
α in our text of Homer and widely elsewhere);
⁴ The etymology ὀλισθ- < ∗h₃lisdʰ- ← ∗h₃slidʰ- (cf. Skt. ásridʰānas ‘not going wrong’, OE slīdan
‘to slide’, etc.; LIV s.v. ∗h₃sleid̯ʰ) is ingenious and attractive—one might almost say inspired—but
uncertain, and it does not affect our assessment of the Greek paradigm.


===== PDF PAGE 192 =====
182 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗ḱemh₂- ‘get tired’ (LIV s.v.; cf. zero-grade ∗ḱm̥ h₂tós ‘tired’ > ∗κμᾱτ´ος in
Hom. h. ἄκμητος ‘tireless’), pres. ∗ḱm̥ -né-h₁- ~ ∗ḱm-n̥ -h₁- (cf. Vedic Skt 2sg.
´samnīṣe) >→ aor. καμɛ˜ν, pres. κάμνɛ¯ν.
There are just enough stem-cognates to suggest that nasal-infixed presents to these
verbs were inherited, but the root-final laryngeal has somehow been lost; alterna-
tively, a ‘converse of Sievers’ Law’ might have operated in the prehistory of Greek,
though only in derived environments, since δαπάνη, for instance, was not affected
(see 3.6.1). In any case Greek evidently evolved a present stem suffix -νε/ο-. That
is clear from the remaining example with a light root:
PIE ∗denḱ- ‘bite’ (?; LIV s.v., cf. Skt daṃ´sayati ‘(s)he causes to bite’, first attested
in the Sūtras) ~ ∗dn̥ ḱ- in aor. δακɛ˜ν (Il. thrice), pres. δάκνɛ¯ν (Att., Ion.).
The obvious conclusion to be drawn is that there is nothing very old in this whole
complex of present stems, especially since none of the examples in -ανε/ο- has
stem-cognates in other IE languages.
The same can be said of the presents in -ανε/ο- that also exhibit a nasal-infix in
the root. In two of the Homeric examples, and perhaps in one later example, the
root-internal nasal is etymologically part of the root:
(post-)PIE ∗ gʰend- ~ ∗ gʰn̥ d- ‘grasp’ (cf. Lat. prehendere; LIV s.v. ∗ gʰed, and see
further below): aor. ∗ gʰn̥ d-é/ó- > χαδɛ˜ν, desiderative ∗ gʰénd-se/o- > fut. 3sg.
χείσεται ‘will contain, will have room for’ Od. 18.17 (ει = ¯);ɛ perf. ∗ gʰegʰónd-
‘contain’ in plup. 3sg. κεχ´ονδει ‘it contained’ Il. 24.192; on the root-ablaut of
pres. χανδάνɛ¯ν see below;
pre-Gk ∗lengʰ- ~ ∗ln̥ gʰ- ‘get by lot’: aor. ∗ln̥ gʰ-é/ó- > λαχɛ˜ν, perf. ∗lelóngʰ-
in 3pl. λελ´ογχασιν ‘they have (by the working of fate)’ Od. 11.304; pres.
λαγχάνɛ¯ν as for χανδάνɛ¯ν;
pre-Gk ∗mendʰ- ~ ∗ mn̥ dʰ- ‘learn’ (?; see Frisk s.v. μανθάνω for possible cog-
nates): aor. ∗ mn̥ dʰ-é/ó- > μαθɛ˜ν (thrice in Homer); pres. μανθάνɛ¯ν (5th c.)
as for χανδάνɛ¯ν.
It is often suggested that χανδάνɛ¯ν reflects a PIE nasal-infixed present, but that is
not what the distribution of facts argues. Not all the cognates adduced are equally
certain, but in most the nasal is synchronically part of the root; ∗ gʰed- appears
only in the family of PGmc. ∗-getaną and in Lat. praeda ‘plunder, booty’ (∗prai-
hed-). It is certainly possible that the form of the root with an internal nasal began
its career as a nasal-infixed present, but it needs to be remembered that partially
similar roots with apparently identical meanings are not rare in IE (e.g. ∗ gʷem-
and ∗ gʷah₂-, both ‘step’). Klingenschmitt (1982: 184, fn. 26), suggests that the
root-vocalism of pres. χανδάνɛ¯ν can be explained by reanalysis of a nasal-infixed


===== PDF PAGE 193 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 183
present: the heavy Lindeman variant ∗ gʰn̥ éd- was reinterpreted as ∗ gʰn̥ -né-d-, and
the sequence ∗ -n̥ n- yielded -αν-. But if that were true the reanalysis must have
occurred very early, and it is difficult to see why the future and perfect continue
to exhibit the expected inherited ablaut grades of ∗ gʰend-; it seems much more
likely that the first α of χανδάνɛ¯ν was simply leveled in from the aorist, the pivotal
member of an eventive verb in early Greek.
But though the nasals in the roots of these presents were not originally infixed
(at least from a Greek point of view), they were certainly reinterpreted as an infix
by native learners. That reanalysis is already underway in the Homeric poems; it
will be described in 5.4.2, where other nasal-infixed stems that have been claimed
to be inherited (λιμπάνɛ¯ν, πυνθάνεσθαι) will also be discussed.
Mention should also be made of one more development of nasal-infixed
presents, namely the extension of the zero grade with ∗-ye/o-. An example proba-
bly based on an inherited stem is:
PIE pres. ∗u-né-bʰ- ‘be weaving’ (Skt 2sg. sám unap) → ∗ubʰ-né-H- (Skt inj.
2sg. ubʰnā́ s, 3sg. with augment aubʰnāt) → ∗ubʰ-n̥ -H-yé/ó- > ∗ὐφανjε/ο- >
Hom., etc. ὑφαίνɛ¯ν.
A more involved example is the only Greek present still reduplicated with ∗e:
PIE ∗térh₁- ~ ∗tr̥ h₁- ‘bore’ (Hom. τέρετρον ‘auger, gimlet’, τρητ´ος ‘perforated’,
3.2.3) in press. ∗téterh₁- ~ ∗tétr̥ h₁- and ∗tr̥ -né-h₁- ~ ∗tr-n̥ -h₁- (?) >→ ∗te-
tr-n̥ -h₁-yé/ó- > τετραίνɛ¯ν (directly attested only from the 5th century, but
implied by Hom. aor. τέτρηνε).
As the derivation just given suggests, this looks like a conflation of two different
present stems. Unfortunately neither has an external stem-cognate; all the other
languages that preserve the verb appear to exhibit thematized root-presents (LIV
s.v. ∗terh₁).
4.2.1 (iii) Affixed thematic presents
This section deals with affixed thematic presents other than those in ∗-ye/o-, for
which, see 4.2.1 (v).
Though all the thematic nasal suffixes of Greek presents must ultimately have
arisen from athematic formations, the same does not seem to be true of redupli-
cated thematic presents. Three do reflect original athematic stems:
PIE ∗téteḱ- ~ ∗tetḱ- ‘fashion, make’ (3pl. ∗tétḱn̥ ti > Vedic Skt tákṣati, to which
3sg. tā́ ṣṭi was backformed) >→ ∗τιτκε/ο- > τίκτɛ¯ν ‘be giving birth’ (aor.
τεκɛ˜ν);


===== PDF PAGE 194 =====
184 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗ǵiǵénh₁- ~ ∗ǵiǵn̥ h₁- ‘beget’ (cf. Vedic Skt aor. ájījanat, Lat. pres. gignere)
>→ mid. γίγνεσθαι ‘be born, become’ (aor. γενέσθαι); exactly how the laryn-
geal was lost remains unclear, but the full grade of the Sanskrit stem argues
that the paradigm was originally ablauting, therefore athematic;
PIE ∗nı´nes- ~ ∗nins- ‘escape, return safely’ (cf. Vedic Skt nı´ṃsate ‘(s)he greets’,
inj. niṃsata ‘it returns (to the earth)’ (?) RV X.74.2) >→ Hom. acc. νῑσ´ομενον
‘returning’, νί̄σοντο ‘they usually retreated’, etc.
Positing an originally athematic stem for the last example is probably the best
explanation for the survival of the -σ-: in an athematic middle stem ∗ninh- ~ ∗nins-
the latter alternant, which must have occurred in the pivotal 3sg., can have been
leveled through the paradigm when the alternation ∗ s ~ ∗h was no longer auto-
matic, and only then was the stem thematized.⁵ But two other stems are thematic
in every language in which they are attested, one even in Hittite:
PIE ∗mı´mne/o- ‘be waiting’ (Hitt. mimmai ‘(s)he refuses’ ← ∗‘hesitates’) >
μίμνɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗sı´sde/o- ‘be (in the act of ) sitting down’ (Skt 3sg. sı̄́dati, Av. niš.hiδaiti, Lat.
cōnsīdere) > ἵζɛσθαι.
The remaining two examples appear to be innovations confined to Greek:
pre-Gk ∗sı´-sǵʰ-e/o- ‘hold’ > ∗hiskʰe/o- > ἴσχɛ¯ν, beside more common ἔχɛ¯ν (cog-
nate with Skt sáhate ‘(s)he prevails’); the reduplicated present is directly
attested only in Homer (and Homericizing later Greek), but indirectly also
in Att. ὑπισχνɛ˜σθαι ‘to promise’ with further suffixation;
pre-Gk ∗pi-pt-e/o- ‘be falling’ >→ πῑ́πτɛ¯ν (vs. e.g. Skt pátati ‘it flies, it falls’).
In our text tradition the reduplicating vowel of the latter stem is consistently long
(e.g. ipf. πῖπτε(ν), πῖπτον in Homer), which cannot be original; lexical analogy
with ῥί̄πτɛ¯ν ‘throw’ is the most likely explanation.
Of the many presents in -σκε/ο- that are attested already in Homer, only four
have clear stem-cognates elsewhere in the family (cf. Zerdin 2000: 39–41):
PIE ∗h₁sḱé/ó- ‘be habitually’ (underlyingly ∗/h₁s-sḱé/ó-/ with reduction of
geminate ∗ss; cf. Palaic iptv. iska ‘be!’, Old Lat. 3sg. escit ‘will be’, Toch. B
copula 3pl. skente, and see Hackstein 1995: 277–82, LIV s.v. 1. ∗h₁es, both
with references) > Hom. iterative ipf. 3pl. ἔσκε;
PIE ∗misḱé/ó- ‘mix continuously’ (underlyingly ∗/miḱ-sḱé/ó-/; cf. Lat. miscēre),
remodeled as ∗μιγ-σκέ/´ο- > μίσγɛ¯ν ‘to be mixing’;
⁵ This solution goes back at least to Pokorny (1959) s.v. nes-. For alternative explanations, see Frisk
s.v. νέομαι, LIV s.v. ∗ nes, and Barber (2013: 259–60), all with references.


===== PDF PAGE 195 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 185
PIE ∗ gʷm̥ -sḱé/ó- ‘step repeatedly, walk’ (cf. Skt 3sg. gáccʰati ‘(s)he goes’) >
βάσκɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗ǵn̥ h₃-sḱé/ó- ‘recognize on sight’ (cf. Lat. nōscere, OPers. subj. 3sg.
xšnāsātiy) > γν ωσκɛ´¯ν (attributed to Epirote by a grammarian, Filos 2018:
238) → γιγν ωσκɛ´¯ν.
How and why ‘mix’ was remodeled as μειγ- does not seem to be recoverable;
the origin of the reduplication in γιγνωσκɛ ´¯ν is likewise obscure. A possible fifth
example is:
PIE ∗h₂lu-sḱé/ó- ‘keep away, avoid’ (?; Toch. B /aləskə/e-/, Hackstein 1995:
215–16, LIV s.v. ∗h₂leu̯ ) > ptc. ἀλύσκων (twice in Od. 22); but see now Peyrot
(2013: 584).
A larger number of Homeric examples, plus a couple attested only later, could
also be inherited; the absence of stem-cognates might be attributed to the fact
that even root-cognates of these verbs are very sparse (and in some cases doubt-
ful). The following exhibit the expected zero grade of the root and no obvious
complications:⁶
PIE ∗dʰerh₃- ‘jump’ (cf. Middle Irish ipf. 3sg. no.daired ‘(the bull) kept mount-
ing’, LIV s.v. ∗dʰerh₃ with references) in pre-Gk ∗dʰr̥ h₃-ské/ó- > Hom.
θρ ωσκɛ¯ν,´ aor. θορɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗ gʰan- ‘gape’ (ON gana, LIV s.v. gʰan) in pre-Gk ∗ gʰn̥ -ské/ó- > Ion., Att.
χάσκɛ¯ν, aor. χανɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗dʰenh₂- ‘run (away)’ (?; see LIV s.v.) in pre-Gk ∗dʰn̥ h₂-ské/ó- > θνᾱ́ σκɛ¯ν
‘to be dying’ > Att.-Ion. θνήσκɛ¯ν,⁷ aor. θανɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗melh₃- (?; see LIV s.v.) in pre-Gk ∗ml̥h₃-ské/ó- > Hom. προ-, κατα-
βλ ωσκɛ´¯ν ‘to come forward/down’, aor. Hom., Dor. μολɛ˜ν;
post-PIE ∗kʷendʰ- (?; see LIV s.v.) in pre-Gk ∗kʷn̥ tʰ-ské/ó- > πάσχɛ¯ν ‘to
experience’, aor. παθɛ˜ν.
In addition, there are two examples with both reduplication and the suffix -σκε/ο-
that might have developed from inherited presents in ∗-ské/ó-, like γιγν ωσκɛ¯ν:´
PIE ∗terh₃- ‘wound’ (cf. Vedic Skt nt. turám ‘wounded’, RV VIII.79.2) in pre-
Gk ∗tr̥ h₃-ské/ó- > ∗τρ ´ωσκɛ¯ν → Ion., Att. τιτρωσκɛ¯ν, ´ Hom. aor. 3sg. ἔτορε ‘it
pierced’Il. 11.236;
⁶ I do not include ἔρχεσθαι ‘go, come’, since a sound-change ∗ρσκ > ρχ is unparalleled; it seems much
more likely that the verb is cognate with the OIr. imperative eirgg ‘go!’ (see LIV s.v. ∗h₁erg ̑ʰ, of which
the original meaning is probably not ‘besteigen’).
⁷ Though θνήισκɛ¯ν is certainly an innovation, it is not merely a spelling variant, since it appears
consistently in 4th-century Attic inscriptions (Threatte 1980: 372, 1996: 505; once θνείσκω with the
regular sound-change development of ηι, Threatte 1980: 739).


===== PDF PAGE 196 =====
186 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗mnah₂- (?; see LIV s.v. ∗mneh₂) in pre-Gk ∗ mn̥ h₂-ské/ó- ‘remind, remem-
ber’ > mid. 3sg. μνήσκεται (Anakreon, elegiac fr. 2.4) → μιμνήσκɛ¯ν, -εσθαι.⁸
But it seems just as likely that the latter example was modeled on γιγν ωσκɛ¯ν,´ since
‘recognize’ and ‘remember’ belong to the same semantic area; and it is clear that
this reduplicated formation remained marginally productive in Greek, eventually
yielding Hellenistic πιπρᾱ́ σκɛ¯ν as a replacement for Hom. περνα- ‘sell’, for instance.
4.2.1 (iv) Unaffixed thematic presents
As in most daughters (though not in Anatolian or Tocharian, see 2.3.3), the largest
group of inherited thematic presents exhibits e-grade of the root and no affix. Some
of these clearly reflect thematization of athematic presents, but even in those cases
related languages often exhibit a parallel thematization. The three which appear
in Tocharian are represented in Greek as well:
PIE ∗h₂áǵe/o- ‘be driving’ (3sg. Toch. B ā´sa¨ṃ, Skt ájati; Lat. agere, etc.) > ἄγɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗bʰére/o- ‘be carrying’ (3sg. Toch. B para¨ṃ, Skt bʰárati; Goth. baı´ran, etc.)
> φέρɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗ gʷ´hı ₃we/o- ‘be alive, live’ (3sg. Toch. B ´saiṃ, Skt jı̄́vati; Lat. vīvere, etc.)
→ ∗ gʷyóh₃we/o- (with the same analogical full grade as ζω´ος, see 3.2.3) >
Hom., etc. ζ ωɛ¯ν.´
Many others have stem-cognates in conservative IE languages; typical are:
PIE ∗bʰéydʰe/o- ‘trust’ (Lat. fīdere, Goth. beidan ‘to wait for’) > πείθεσθαι ‘to
obey’;
PIE ∗dére/o- ‘tear’ (OCS 3sg. deretŭ; Goth. gataı´ran ‘to break, to destroy’) >
δέρɛ¯ν ‘to skin’;
PIE ∗éwse/o- ‘burn (trans.)’ (Skt 3sg. óṣati, Lat. ūrere) >→ εὕɛ¯ν ‘to singe’
(diphthong reintroduced from aor. εὗσαι);
PIE ∗géme/o- ‘squeeze’ vel sim. (Lat. gemere ‘to sigh’) > γέμɛ¯ν ‘to be full’;
PIE ∗h₁réwge/o- ‘belch’ (Lat. ē-rūgere) > ἐρεύγεσθαι ‘to disgorge’;
PIE ∗h₂ánǵʰe/o- ‘choke’ (Lat. angere) > ἄγχɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂lége/o- ‘care about’ (Lat. dī-ligere ‘to love’) > Hom. 3sg. ἀλέγει;
PIE ∗(h₃)méyǵʰe/o- ‘urinate’ (Skt 3sg. méhati, Lat. meiere, ON mı´ga) >
ὀμείχειν, Hesiod Works and Days 727;
PIE ∗léǵe/o- ‘collect’ (Lat. legere ‘to collect; to read’) > λέγɛ¯ν ‘to say’, συλ-λέγɛ¯ν
‘to collect’;
PIE ∗néme/o- ‘distribute’ (Goth. niman ‘to take’) > νέμɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗pérde/o- ‘fart’ (Skt 3sg. pardate) > πέρδεσθαι;
PIE ∗péte/o- ‘fly’ (Skt 3sg. pátati; Lat. petere ‘to go for, to seek’) > πέτεσθαι;
⁸ However, μνᾶσθαι ‘to court’ seems just as likely to be a denominative to ∗βνᾱ- < ∗ gʷnah₂- ‘woman’
(Meister 1921: 88; cf. Modern English womanize).


===== PDF PAGE 197 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 187
PIE ∗pléwe/o- ‘float’ (Skt 3sg. plávate; Lat. pluere ‘to rain’) > ∗πλέϝɛ¯ν ‘to sail’ >
πλɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗sékʷe/o- ‘accompany, follow’ (Skt 3sg. sácate, Lat. sequī) > ἕπεσθαι;
PIE ∗sérpe/o- ‘crawl’ (Skt 3sg. sárpati, Lat. serpere) > ἕρπɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗snéygʷʰe/o- ‘snow’ (OHG snīwan; OLat. 3sg. nīvit?⁹) > νείφɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗(s)tége/o- ‘cover’ (Lat. tegere) > στέγɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗ténge/o- ‘moisten’ (Lat. tingere) > τέγγɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗tréme/o- ‘tremble’ (Lat. tremere) > τρέμɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗trése/o- ‘fear’ (Skt 3sg. trásati) > ∗τρέhɛ¯ν > τρɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗wéǵʰe/o- ‘convey’ (Skt 3sg. váhati, Lat. vehere) > Pamphylian iptv. 3sg.
ϝεχέτō, Brixhe 3.24? But see the discussion of Brixhe (1976: 183).
Among those that clearly reflect earlier athematic presents are:
PIE ∗h₃rḗǵ- ~ ∗h₃réǵ- ‘make straight’ (Vedic Skt rā́ ṣṭi ‘he rules’ RV I.104.4) →
∗h₃réǵe/o- (Lat. regere ‘to guide, to rule’) > ὀρέγɛ¯ν ‘to stretch out’;
PIE ∗h₂mḗlǵ- ~ ∗h₂mélǵ- ‘stroke, milk’ (Vedic Skt sáṃ sā́ nu mārjmi ‘I stroke
(his) back’ RV II.35.12; Lith. 3sg. mélzˇa ‘(s)he milks’ with lengthened grade
thematized) → ∗h₂mélǵe/o- ‘milk’ (OE melcan) > ἀμέλγɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗trép- ~ ∗tr̥ p- ‘turn’ (Hitt. 3sg. teripzi ‘(s)he plows’) → ∗trépe/o- > τρέπɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗sép- ~ ∗sp- ‘take care of ’ (Gāthā-Av. 3sg. haptī ‘(s)he keeps’) → ∗sépe/o-
(Vedic Skt 3sg. sápati ‘(s)he honors’) > Hom. ἕπɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗dʰéwgʰ- ~ ∗dʰugʰ- ‘produce’ (Skt 3sg. dógdʰi ‘(s)he milks’, duhé ‘it gives
milk’) → ∗dʰéwgʰe/o- > Hom. τεύχɛ¯ν ‘to fashion, to make’;
PIE ∗léyǵʰ- ~ ∗liǵʰ- ‘lick’ (Skt. 3sg. réḍʰi) → ∗léyǵʰe/o- > λείχɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗h₁léngʰ- ~ ∗h₁ln̥ gʰ- ‘clear oneself by oath’ (Hitt. 3sg. linkzi ‘(s)he swears’)
→ ∗h₁léngʰe/o- > ἐλέγχɛ¯ν ‘to shame, to cross-examine, to refute’.
It is difficult to say whether any of these thematizations had occurred by the
Proto-Greek stage, since athematic presents continued to be thematized within the
attested history of Greek (see 5.4.2 (i)). Note that the accentuation of the adjec-
tive ἑκ ων´ ‘willing’ agrees with that of Skt athematic u´sánt-‘wanting’, suggesting
that whatever forms of the stem survived into Proto-Greek were still athematic.¹⁰
One stem, though, probably was thematized well before the separate prehistory of
Greek, since its Hittite cognate is inflected according to the hi-conjugation, which
in Nuclear IE survived only as the perfect (see 2.3.3 (i)):
⁹ Or possibly nivit, since the only attestation is in a senarius of Pacuvius: nιvit̄̆ sagittīs; plumbīs, saxīs
grandinat.
¹⁰ The ablaut of the root is more of a problem. Indo-Iranian reflects ∗wéḱ- ~ ∗uḱ- (e.g. Skt 3sg. váṣṭi,
3pl. u´sánti), but Hittite clearly reflects Narten ablaut ∗wḗḱ- ~ ∗wéḱ- (3sg. wēkzi, 3pl. wekkanzi). In effect,
the surviving Greek participle has the accent of the Sanskrit paradigm but (apparently) the root-ablaut
of the Hittite paradigm, and there is more than one way in which that could have come about.


===== PDF PAGE 198 =====
188 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗spónd- ~ ∗spénd- ‘pour a libation’ (Hitt. 3sg. ispanti ~ sipandi) →
∗spénde/o- > σπένδɛ¯ν.
Much more startling are those Greek thematic presents that reflect inherited aorist
subjunctives. A clear example, noted in LIV s.v. ∗ g̑ eu̯ s, is:
PIE aor. ∗ǵéws- ~ ∗ǵus- ‘taste’ (Skt juṣāṇá-‘enjoying’, multiply attested in the
Rigveda), subj. ∗ǵéws-e/o- (Vedic Skt jóṣat, joṣati, four times in the Rigveda)
→ Gk pres. ∗γεύhε/ο- >→ γεύεσθαι;
equally clear is an example whose PIE present was nasal-infixed:
PIE pres. 3sg. ∗linékʷti, 3pl. ∗linkʷénti ‘leave behind’ (Skt riṇákti, riñcánti; cf.
Lat. linquere), aor. ∗léykʷ- ~ ∗likʷ- (cf. Lat. perf. 3sg. līquit, Gk aor. λιπɛ˜ν
(thematized, see 4.2.2)), subj. ∗léykʷ-e/o- → Gk pres. ∗λείκʷε/ο- >→ λείπɛ¯ν.
Both these aorist subjunctives also became presents in Germanic (cf. Goth. kiusan
‘to test’, leiƕan ‘to lend’), but since Germanic abandoned the inherited con-
trast of aspects, as well as the contrast between indicative and subjunctive, that
is not surprising (Ringe 2017: 182–6). In Greek it is surprising, because those
contrasts have remained integral to the verb system (even in Modern Greek). A
similar case is Hom., etc. στείχɛ¯ν ‘to go, to march’, which matches Goth. steigan
‘to ascend’, both probably reflecting an aorist subjunctive, since a nasal-suffixed
present can be reconstructed from Vedic Skt pres. 3sg. prá stiṅnoti ‘he makes
progress’ (Maitrāyaṇī-Saṃhitā 2.1.12) and OCS postignǫti ‘to reach, to arrive at’
(Ringe 2012: 129). Further examples, typically surviving along with zero-grade
thematic aorists, are φεύγɛ¯ν ‘to be trying to escape’, τέρπεσθαι ‘to enjoy oneself ’,
and Hom. δέρκεσθαι ‘to see’ and κλέεσθαι ‘to be renowned’ (Ringe 2012: 127–
8). Even Hom. πεύθεσθαι ‘to find out’, which matches not only Goth. anabiudan
‘to command’ but also Skt 3sg. bódʰati ‘(s)he observes’, can reasonably be sus-
pected of reflecting an aorist subjunctive; so can Hom. 3sg. πέλει, πέλεται ‘it is’
as well as Skt 3sg. cárati ‘(s)he wanders’ and Lat. colere ‘to cultivate’, given that an
affixed present to ∗kʷel- ‘turn’ actually survives in Hom. περι-τελλ´ομενος ‘revolv-
ing’ (Ringe, loc. cit.).¹¹ Such ‘crossovers’ between aspect and mood forms would be
a bit less surprising if the categories in question were still derivational, rather than
inflectional, for some time during the individual prehistory of Greek, and that is
probably the conclusion that we should draw. But by the Proto-Greek period the
attested inflectional system was fully in place, so far as we can tell; it is noteworthy
¹¹ Of course the original paradigm has undergone a lexical split, but that need not have happened
until after the conditioned developments of labiovelars, after the Mycenaean period. It follows that the
present stem πελε/ο- need not be an Aiolism; it could simply have been created to aor. πλε/ο- after ∗kʷ
had become π before consonants.


===== PDF PAGE 199 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 189
that there seem to be no mismatches between present and aorist stems among the
attested Greek dialects, for example.
Simple thematic presents with zero-grade roots that have stem-cognates in other
branches are notoriously hard to find in any daughter of PIE; most reflect thema-
tization of the zero-grade alternant of an athematic present. At least two Greek
examples clearly reflect such a development (LIV s.vv. ∗gerbʰ , ∗gleu̯ bʰ):
PIE ∗gérbʰ- ~ ∗ gr̥ bʰ- ‘cut (into)’ (cf. OE ċeorfan ‘to cut’, with full grade thema-
tized) >→ Gk ∗γρ̥φέ/´ο- > γράφɛ¯ν Hom. ‘to scratch, to graze (with a weapon),
to engrave’, later ‘to write’;
PIE ∗gléwbʰ- ~ ∗glubʰ- ‘carve’ (cf. OE clēofan ‘to split’, Lat. glūbere ‘to peel’, both
with full grade thematized) >→ Gk γλύφɛ¯ν.
A possible exception to the usual pattern is a present made to PIE ∗lewH- ‘cut (a
rope)’, which appears in Greek as Hom. 3sg. λύει ‘(s)he unties, (s)he lets loose’, etc.
(mostly with ῠ) and in Latin as (poenās) luere ‘to pay the penalty’ (see LIV s.v.
leu̯ H). But a nasal-infixed present is also attested in Skt 3sg. lunā́ ti ‘(s)he cuts off ’
(in the Brāhmaṇas), which because of its short u must be comparatively old; that
raises the suspicion that the thematic present might reflect an inherited thematized
aorist. There are a fair number of thematic presents of this type attested already
in Homer; how many of them were inherited from Proto-Greek is necessarily
uncertain.
4.2.1 (v) Presents in ∗-ye/o-
The final category of inherited presents exhibits the suffix ∗-ye/o-, both accented
and unaccented; they are very numerous, and in Greek they have ramified into a
range of different types with different histories and productivities. As I noted in
3.6.1, the heavy Sievers’ Law variant of this suffix has been eliminated completely
in Greek.¹²
Some basic PIE verbs constructed presents with full-grade roots and an unac-
cented suffix (to judge from the few examples in which evidence for the accent sur-
vives). Several such presents survived in Greek; clear examples with stem-cognates
elsewhere include:
PIE ∗spéḱ-ye/o- ‘look at, watch’ (Old Lat. specere, 1sg. speciō; Skt 3sg. pá´syati
‘(s)he sees’) >→ ∗skép-ye/o- (with metathesis) > σκέπτεσθαι;
PIE ∗ gʷʰédʰ-ye/o- ‘ask for’ (Goth. bidjan, Av. 1sg. ǰaiδiieimi) > θέσσεσθαι
(Hesychios);
PIE ∗stél-ye/o- ‘make ready’ (OCS posteljetŭ ‘(s)he will spread out’) > στέλλɛ¯ν
‘to equip, to provide; to send’ (LIV s.v. ∗stel);
¹² For valuable extensive discussion of these stems, especially but not only in light of Sievers’ Law,
see Barber (2013: 217–375), especially the conclusions of pp. 363–4.


===== PDF PAGE 200 =====
190 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗h₂arh₃- ‘plow’, pres. ∗h₂árye/o- (Middle Irish 3sg. airid) → ∗h₂árh₃ye/o-
(by leveling from related forms; cf. Lat. arāre) > ∗ἀροjε/ο- > ἀρõν.
Further likely examples include:
PIE ∗snéh₁-ye/o- ‘twist, spin (thread)’ (OIr. 3sg. con.snı´ ‘(s)he contends for’,
Lat. nēre ‘to spin’) > ∗νηjε/ο- > νῆν (but a root-present is also possible; so
LIV s.v. ∗sneh₁);
PIE ∗knáh₂-ye/o- ‘scrape’ (Lith. 3sg. knója ‘(s)he peels’, OHG nuoen ‘to plane,
to smooth’) > ∗κνᾱjε/ο- ‘grate (cheese)’ > ipf. 3sg. ἐπὶ … κνῆ Il. 11.639, Att.
inf. κνῆν;
PIE ∗plóh₃-ye/o- ‘float’ (OE flōwan ‘to flow’) > Ion. πλ ωɛ¯ν´ ‘to sail’;
PIE ∗srég-ye/o- ‘color, dye’ (Vedic Skt rajyate ‘(s)he blushes’, Atharvaveda) >
ῥέζɛ¯ν (Epicharmos fr. 106, but see the cautions of Barber 2013: 356–7).
Underived presents in accented ∗-yé/ó- with zero-grade roots may have been more
numerous in PIE. Examples that survive in Greek with stem-cognates elsewhere
include at least the following:
PIE ∗ wr̥ ǵ-yé/ó- ‘be working, be making’ (Goth. waúrkjan, Av. 3sg. vərəziieiti)
> PGk ∗ϝρ̥ζε/ο- > Myc. 3sg. wo-ze ∗/wórʤei/ vel sim., >→ ∗ϝέρσδεhεν (with
ε leveled in from aor. ∗ϝέρξαι) > Hom. ἔρδειν (cf. Barber 2013: 355–6);¹³
PIE ∗nigʷ-yé/ó- ‘be washing’ (OIr. 3sg. nigid, Thurneysen 1946: 119) >
∗νιγjε/ο- > νίζɛ¯ν;
PIE ∗kh₂p-ié/ó- ‘be grabbing’ (Lat. capere ‘to take’, OE hebban ‘to lift’) >→
∗καπjε/ο- > κάπτɛ¯ν ‘to gulp down’;
PIE ∗ gʷh₂bʰ-ié/ó- ‘be dipping in water’ (ON kvefja) >→ ∗γʷαφjε/ο- > βάπτɛ¯ν;
PIE pres. ∗ gʷm̥ -yé/ó- ‘step (repeatedly), walk’ (Lat. venīre ‘to come’) >
∗γʷąνjε/ο- > βαίνν ‘to go’;
PIE ∗ mn̥ yétor ‘(s)he is mentally active’ → post-PIE ∗ mn̥ yétoy (Skt mányate
‘(s)he thinks’) > ∗μąνjετοι >→ μαίνεται ‘(s)he is raving’;
PIE ∗h₂tug-yé/ó- ‘be terrified’ (Skt tujyáte ‘flees’, RV I.84.17; cf. Hitt. hatugis
‘frightful’, Benveniste 1937) > Hom. ptc. ἀτυζ´ομενος ‘scared witless, crazed’;
PIE ∗dh₁-ié/ó- ‘be tying’ (Vedic Skt dyati, Atharvaveda) > ∗δέjεhεν > δɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗ sr̥ h₃-yé/ó- ‘rush’ vel sim. (Hitt. sarhieddu ‘let him attack’, LIV s.v. ∗serh₃)
> ∗hρωjε/ο- > Hom. ipf. 3pl. ῥ ωοντο´ ‘they moved swiftly’ Il. 18.411, 417.
There are other potential examples, but some can be suspected of reflecting par-
allel development; most notoriously, though the long ῡ of Att. φʋ̄́ εσθαι ‘to grow’
suggests that it could reflect ∗bʰuH-ye/o-, like Lat. fierī ‘to become’ and OIr. biïd
‘it customarily is’, it is much more likely to be a post-Homeric innovation based
¹³ On the alternative present ῥέζɛ¯ν, see Barber, loc. cit., with references.


===== PDF PAGE 201 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 191
on the inherited root-aorist (see Frisk s.v. φʋ́̄ομαι, LIV s.v. ∗bʰu̯ eh₂, n. 15).¹⁴ The
root-ablaut of some Greek presents in ∗-ye/o- is uncertain for various reasons. In
at least one case the ambiguity is phonological:
PIE ∗h₂áws-ie/o- or ∗h₂us-yé/ó- ‘to draw (water)’ (probably either would
yield Palaic 3pl. hussīnta and Lat. haurīre, the latter with hypercorrect or
analogical h-) > Hom. subj. 3sg. αὕῃ ‘(lest) he have to fetch fire’ Od. 5.490.
In some cases the reconstruction of the PIE root is uncertain. For instance, I
adduced the following examples with full-grade roots in 3.6.3 above:
PIE ∗sál-ye/o- ‘be jumping’ (Lat. salīre) > ἅλλεσθαι;
PIE ∗kʷát-ye/o- (?) ‘shake’ (Lat. quatere) > πάσσɛ¯ν, Att. πάττɛ¯ν ‘to sprinkle’;
LIV s.vv. 1. ∗sel, ∗(s)ku̯ eh₁t suggest alternative reconstructions, less straightforward
(especially in the latter case) but not impossible, according to which these presents
would have zero-grade roots.
In some cases the comparative facts suggest fairly strongly that a Greek present
in ∗-ye/o- might not be original even if there seem to be stem-cognates in other
languages. For instance, it is reasonable to posit
PIE ∗ǵʰr̥ yé/ó- (?) ‘be pleased (with)’ (Old Lat. 3sg. horitur ‘(s)he encourages,
urges’) > ∗χαρjε/ο- > χαίρɛ¯ν ‘to rejoice, to be glad’,
but there is also evidence for a full-grade present with the same suffix, namely
PIE ∗ǵʰérye/o- (?; Skt 3sg. háryati ‘(s)he accepts gladly’, Sabellian ∗herye- ‘wish’
in 3sg. subj. Oscan heriiad, fut. Umbrian heriest).
At least one must be an innovation, and both could be; the difference in ablaut
actually suggests a root-present, though it is unclear why its reflexes have been
suffixed with ∗-ye/o- in all the daughters rather than simply thematized. Another
such case is
PIE ∗h₁rép-ye/o- (?) ‘snatch’ > Gk ἐρέπτεσθαι ‘bite off, consume’ but ∗h₁r̥ p-
yé/ó- (?) >→ Lat. rapere (see the notes at LIV s.v. ∗ rep, likewise noting the
possibility of a root-present).
¹⁴ That Gk τύπτɛ¯ν ‘to beat’ < ∗tup-yé/ó- is cognate with 3sg. Luvian tūpīti, Lycian tubidi (LIV
s.v. ∗(s)teu ̯p) is doubtful; Melchert (1994a: 76, 242), etc., reconstructs the Proto-Anatolian stem as
∗(s)toubéye/o-, since the lenition of the 3sg. ending is best explained by unaccented vowels both
preceding and following (p. 60).


===== PDF PAGE 202 =====
192 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
A case of a somewhat different kind is
PIE ∗klép-ye/o- ‘be stealing’ (?; Toch. B inf. ka¨lypītsi; Hackstein 1995: 216–17)
> κλέπτɛ¯ν, but
PIE ∗klép-e/o- (?) > Old Lat. clepere, Goth. hlifan.
That Gothic exhibits a simple thematic present proves nothing, since that language
has remodeled even some j-presents that survive elsewhere in Germanic (sitan,
ligan, swaran in place of ∗sitjaną ‘to sit’, ∗ligjaną ‘to lie’, ∗swarjaną ‘to swear’), but
the Old Latin simple thematic present is less likely to be a secondary development;
once again remodeling of a root-present should at least be considered (see also
Hackstein 1995: 216–17, Barber 2013: 358). A similar case is
PIE ∗wert- ‘turn’, pres. usually ∗wért-e/o- (3sg. Skt vártate, Lat. vertitur; Goth.
waı´rþan ‘to become’), but ∗wért-ye/o- > ἔρρɛ¯ν ‘to go away (badly / to a bad
place)’ (Forssman 1980: 186–98).
These last two cases suggest that Greek might have remodeled some simple the-
matic presents as presents in ∗-ye/o- (LIV s.vv. ∗klep, ∗ u̯ ert; see also Barber 2013:
359–60). Possibly the strongest argument in favor of such a hypothesis is
PIE ∗pekʷ- ‘cook, ripen’, pres. usually ∗pékʷ-e/o- (Lat. coquere, 3sg. Skt pácati,
OCS pecˇetŭ, Lith. kẽpa, the last two ‘(s)he bakes’), but ∗pékʷ-ye/o- > πέσσɛ¯ν,
Att. πέττɛ¯ν.
The latter appears to be cognate with Vedic derived intransitive pácyate ‘it ripens’,
but since the Greek verb is transitive (in the active) its stem formation is more
likely a Greek innovation (as suggested cautiously by Hackstein 1995: 89).
Greek definitely did remodel some athematic root-presents by adding the suffix
∗-ye/o-. Clear examples include:
PIE ∗ gʷʰén- ~ ∗ gʷʰn̥ - ‘hit, kill’ (3sg. Hitt. kuēnzi, Skt hánti) >→ ∗χʷεν-jε/ο- >
Hom. θεινέμεναι ‘to smite’ (ει = ɛ¯);¹⁵
PIE ∗wémh₁- ~ ∗ wm̥ h₁- ‘vomit’ (Skt 3sg. vámiti) >→ ∗ϝεμε-jε/ο- > ἐμɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗séwH- ~ ∗suH- ‘rain’ (Toch. B 3sg. suwaṃ) >→ ∗hῡ-jε/ο- > ʋ̔̄́ ɛ¯ν (∗H = ∗h₂
if Hitt. hi-conjugation suhha-‘pour out’ is related).
The productive function of accented ∗-yé/ó- in PIE was the formation of derived
presents from nouns and adjectives. Precisely because of its productivity, most
¹⁵ A sparsely attested thematic stem θενε/ο- seems to have been construed as an aorist by Greek poets
(e.g. θεν ων´ ‘smiting’, Pindar Olympian 7.28). That could reflect another ‘aspect crossover’ like pres.
λείπɛ¯ν, and if that is what happened the present could have been formed to the aorist by suffixation;
but we do not really have enough evidence to say for certain what happened.


===== PDF PAGE 203 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 193
examples attested in the daughters are innovations, but at least two Greek exam-
ples were almost certainly inherited:
PIE ∗h₁n̥ h₃mn̥ -yé/ó- ‘name’ (Goth. namnjan, OE nemnan) >→ ∗ὀνομąν-jε/ο-
> ὀνομαίνɛ¯ν ‘to name’;
PIE ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-ié/ó- ‘be sharp-eared’ (Goth. hausjan, OE hīeran, both ‘to
hear’) > ∗akowsié/ó- >→ ∗ἀκοϝhjε/ο- > ἀκούɛ¯ν ‘to hear’.
The former has plausible external cognates and was evidently derived before -τ-
was introduced into the paradigm of ὄνομα; the latter is semantically opaque and
therefore synchronically underived both in Greek and in Germanic. Also likely to
have been inherited is
Att. βλίττɛ¯ν ‘to harvest honey’ < ∗mlit-yé/ó-, formed to the zero grade of μέλι,
μέλιτ- ‘honey’ < PIE ∗mélit- (cf. Hitt. milit, Luvian mallit, Goth. (thematized)
miliþ);
the ablaut of the verb’s base is an unparalleled archaism. Other apparent stem-
cognates are more likely to be parallel innovations. For example, the participles
Vedic Skt sumanasyámānas (five times in the Rigveda) and pl. εὐμενέοντες (Pin-
dar Pythian IV.127), though both meaning ‘well disposed, wishing … well’ and
potentially reflecting an inherited ∗h₁su-menes-yé/ó-, are almost certainly parallel
formations, as is suggested both by the morphology (middle in Sanskrit, active in
Greek) and the syntax (intransitive in Sanskrit, transitive in Greek); also likely to
be parallel formations are Vedic Skt ptc. du. vasnayántā ‘bargaining’ (RV VI.47.21)
and ὠνɛ˜σθαι ‘to bargain for, to buy’ (subj. 2sg. ὠνῆι Hesiod Works and Days 341)
in spite of the fact that their earliest attestations are more or less synonymous.
Some other denominatives must be at least comparatively early formations. Two
others in -αινε/ο- were made to inherited neuter nouns in ∗ -n̥ - before the spread
of -τ- through that class (cf. Barber 2013: 295):
Hom. (∗)πɛ¯ραίνɛ¯ν ‘to fasten (a rope); to finish’,¹⁶ Att. περαίνɛ¯ν ‘to complete, to
finish’ < ∗περϝν̥-jε/ο- ← ∗πέρϝαρ, ∗πέρϝν̥- (Hom. πɛ˜ραρ ‘cord’, pl. πɛ̄́ ρατα also
‘ends, limits’) ←< PIE ∗pérwr̥ , ∗ pr̥ wén- ‘end of a rope’ >→ Vedic Skt párus¹⁷
(RV X.100.5), párvan-‘node, joint’;
Hom., Att.-Ion. σημαίνɛ¯ν ‘to give a sign, to indicate’ ← σῆμα, non-Att.-Ion. σᾶμα
‘sign’ < PIE ∗dʰyáh₂mn̥ > Skt dʰyā́ ma ‘thought’ (?, Brugmann apud Frisk s.v.
σῆμα; the meaning of the protoform is no longer recoverable with certainty).
¹⁶ Actually attested are aor. ptc. du. πειρήναντε ‘having fastened’ Od. 22.175, 192 and perf. pass. 3sg.
πεπείρανται ‘(these things) are past and gone’ Od. 12.37, but since those stems are later formations
based on the present, the inference of a present in -αίνɛ¯ν is not doubtful.
¹⁷ ∗párur was reinterpreted as /párus-/ because /r/ and /s/ have the same phonetic realizations in
many sandhi environments, whence páruṣ-half a dozen times in the Rigveda.


===== PDF PAGE 204 =====
194 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
Especially striking is μιαίνɛ¯ν ‘to stain, to bloody, to defile’, derivationally related to
adj. μιαρ´ος ‘stained, bloodied, defiled’. The alternation between -αρ- and -αν- is
reminiscent of PIE r/n-stems like ∗pérwr̥ , yet no related noun is attested and there
are no convincing external cognates. Speculation about the origin of this deriva-
tional pair seems unprofitable, but it is probably old. Similar is Hom. κῡδαίνɛ¯ν
‘to glorify’, cf. κῡδρ´ος ‘glorious’, κ˜υδος ‘glory’, κῡδι- ‘glorifying’, but in this case we
have a whole set of derivatives obviously belonging to the inherited Caland system,
regardless of the root’s exact etymology (see Frisk s.v. κ˜υδος).
In light of examples like the last two, Schwyzer (1939: 725) suggests that denom-
inative presents in which the thematic vowel ∗-o- seems to have been deleted before
the addition of ∗-yé/ó- (see below) actually reflect a more complex development:
both denominative presents and thematic adjectives were formed to athematic
nouns, typically in ∗-l-, ∗ -r-, or ∗-n-; then the nouns were lost, so that the presents
appeared to have been formed directly to the thematic adjectives; finally that pat-
tern was generalized to other thematic adjectives. What is awkward about this
scenario is that only the innovative examples survive; not a single word-family
that actually illustrates the whole development can be cited. It seems reasonable
to propose an alternative. In Vedic, denominative presents to thematic nominals
normally end in -a-yá-, just as the corresponding Greek class normally end in -ε-
ε/ο-; but there are a few in which the nominal thematic vowel is dropped (see e.g.
Macdonell 1910: 399–400). Since the thematic vowel is normally dropped before
the adjective suffix ∗ -yo- ~ ∗-io- (cf. e.g. ἵππος: ἵππιος), it seems possible that it
was originally dropped also before the denominative suffix (so Barber 2013: 297).
Probably none of the attested examples is inherited (there seem to be no Greek–
Sanskrit cognate pairs), but this group of denominatives is likely to be older, on
the average, than the much larger class in which the thematic vowel of the nominal
is not dropped. Stems attested in Homer include, e.g.:
Hom. ἐχθαίρɛ¯ν ‘to hate’ < ∗ἐχθρ̥-jε/ο- ← ἐχθρ´ος ‘hated’;
καθαίρɛ¯ν ‘to cleanse’ < ∗καθαρ-jε/ο- ← καθαρ´ος ‘clean’;
ῑ̔ μɛ̄́ ρɛ¯ν ‘to desire’ < ∗ῑ̔μερ-jε/ο- ← ἱ̄́μερος ‘desire’ (Barber 2013: 297 n. 3, 369 with
references);
ποικίλλɛ¯ν ‘to make variegated, to embroider’ (ποίκιλλε ‘he depicted’, Il. 18.590)
< ∗ποικιλ-jε/ο- ← ποικίλος ‘many-colored’;
ἀγγέλλɛ¯ν ‘to deliver a message, to announce’ ← ἄγγελος ‘messenger’;
φαρμάσσɛ¯ν, Att. φαρμάττɛ¯ν ‘to cure’ (φαρμάσσων ‘tempering (metal)’ Od.
9.393) < ∗φαρμακ-jε/ο- ← φάρμακον ‘drug, cure’;
Hom. χαλέπτει ‘is angry with’ Od. 4.423 < ∗χαλεπ-jε/ο- ← χαλεπ´ος ‘difficult,
hard to bear, hard to deal with’.
Since ἄγγελος is clearly a loanword, this way of forming denominatives from the-
matic nominals must have been a productive option well down into the separate
prehistory of Greek.


===== PDF PAGE 205 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 195
Denominatives formed from consonant-stem nominals are numerous. Those
formed from n-stems and r-stems typically exhibit zero-grade ∗-αν- < ∗ -n̥ - and
∗-αρ- < ∗ -r̥ - before the denominative suffix (Barber 2013: 295), which is prob-
ably an archaism, but otherwise the bases do not ablaut. Stems attested early
include, e.g.:
ποιμαίνɛ¯ν ‘to pasture, to tend (sheep)’ < ∗ποιμν̥-jε/ο- ← ποιμήν ‘shepherd’;
εὐφραίνɛ¯ν ‘to gladden’ ← ἐΰφρων ‘cheerful’;
(∗)τεκταίνεσθαι ‘to make (of wood)’¹⁸ ← τέκτων ‘carpenter, joiner’;
τεκμαίρεσθαι ‘to indicate, to foretell, to decree’ < ∗τεκμρ̥ -jε/ο- ← τέκμωρ ‘sign,
goal, solution (of a problem)’;
Hom. ipf. 3sg. μελαίνετο ‘it became black’< ∗μελαν-jε/ο- ← μέλᾱς, μέλαν-
‘black’;
Hom. κορύσσɛ¯ν ‘to put a helmet on (someone), to equip’ < ∗κορυθ-jε/ο- ←
κ´ορυς, κ´ορυθ- ‘helmet’;
φυλάσσɛ¯ν, Att. φυλάττɛ¯ν ‘to guard’ < ∗φυλακ-jε/ο- ← φύλαξ, φύλακ- ‘guard’;
κηρʋ̄́ σσɛ¯ν, Att. κηρʋ̄́ ττɛ¯ν ‘to proclaim’ ← κῆρυξ, κήρῡκ- ‘herald’;
Hom. ἀνασσέμεν ‘to be lord, to rule’ < ∗ἀνακ(τ)-jε/ο- ← ἄναξ, ἄνακτ- ‘lord’;
Hom. ἱμάσσɛ¯ν ‘to whip’ < ∗ἱματ-jε/ο-, apparently with zero grade of ἱμᾱ́ ς, ἱμάντ-
‘thong’ (Barber 2013: 296 with n. 2);
Hom. (∗)πεμπάζεσθαι ‘to count (on one’s fingers)’¹⁹ < ∗πεμπαδ-jε/ο- ← πεμπάς,
πεμπάδ- ‘group of five’;
ἐρίζɛ¯ν ‘to quarrel’ < ∗ἐριδ-jε/ο- ← ἔρις, ἔριδ- ‘strife’;
ἁρπάζɛ¯ν ‘to snatch, to rob’ < ∗ἁρπαγ-jε/ο- ← ἅρπαξ, ἅρπαγ- ‘unlawful taking’,
Hesiod Works and Days 356.
Denominatives made to s-stems introduce a further complication. Beside the
forms in -ε-ε/ο- that are normal throughout Greek, Homer has competing forms
in -ει-ε/ο-. For instance, we find ipf. 3pl. ἐτέλειον ‘they fulfilled, they completed’
(Il. twice) ~ τέλεον ‘they completed’ (Il. twice) < ∗τελεh-jε/ο- ← τέλος, τέλε- <
∗τέλεh- ‘end’. This looks like a further instance of the phenomenon observed in
gen. sg. -οιο ~ -ō < ∗-oo (see 3.5.1), but it cannot be: there was a clear morpheme
boundary before the ∗-j-, yet the majority outcome looks like the outcome of ∗-hj-
with no morpheme boundary. It is much more likely that alternants like τελε-
ε/ο-, with no ι, were backformed to aorists like τελέσσαι, on which, see 4.2.2 (iii)
below. If γελᾶν ‘to laugh’ ultimately reflects ∗γελαh-jε/ο- (as seems possible, con-
sidering that most of its derivatives exhibit -σ-), it must have undergone a similar
development; but in the absence of stem-cognates its prehistory is necessarily
uncertain. A more certain case with yet another vowel is ἱδρῶν ‘to sweat’ (ptc.
¹⁸ Securely inferred from aor. 3sg. τεκτήνατο Il. 5.62, etc.
¹⁹ Securely inferred from aor. subj. 3sg. πεμπάσσεται ‘(when) he has counted’; Od. 4.412.


===== PDF PAGE 206 =====
196 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
ἱδρ ωων´ already in Homer), plausibly derived from an s-stem ἱδρ ως´ (Frisk s.v.; see
especially Chantraine 1973: 54).²⁰
In the absence of stem-cognates elsewhere, we cannot be certain that any spe-
cific denominative present made to a consonant stem was already in existence in
Proto-Greek, though all the types attested in Homer very likely reflect Proto-Greek
formations.
A stem which might or might not be denominative is
Hom. ἐρεσσέμεναι ‘to row’ < ∗ἐρετ-jε/ο-, cf. ἐρετμ´ον ‘oar’;
the related noun suggests a verb root ∗ἐρετ-, but potential cognates exhibit no ∗-t-
(cf. LIV s.v. 2. ∗h₁reh₁), nor does ἐρέτης ‘rower’ with suffix ∗-τᾱ-. If the suffix of
this noun were simply ∗-τ- at an earlier stage of the language, the verb could be an
unremarkable denominative; that would obviate the objection of Barber (2013:
248 n. 63) that a denominative deleting ∗-ᾱ- is without parallel. In that case this
would be another very early denominative.
Denominative presents made to nominals ending in vowels in which the vowel
is not deleted are very common in Greek. One large class is in ∗-ε-jε/ο- derived
from thematic nominals; Homeric examples include:
φιλέɛ¯ν ‘to love, to treat kindly’ < ∗φιλε-jε/ο- ← φίλος ‘one’s own, dear, beloved’;
νοɛ˜ν ‘to perceive, to think’ ← ν´οος ‘mind’;
μῡθɛ˜σθαι ‘to speak, to tell’ ← μ˜υθος ‘talk, speech’;
αἰνɛ˜ν ‘to tell, to praise’ ← αἶνος ‘story, praise’;
ἀρῑθμɛ˜ν ‘to count’ ← ἀρῑθμ´ος ‘number’;
χωρɛ˜ν ‘to give ground, to make way’ ← χῶρος ‘ground, place’;
ipf. 3pl. διεμέτρεον ‘they measured out’ Il. 3.315 ← μέτρον ‘measure’;
ipf. 3pl. ὥπλεον ‘they got (the wagon) ready’ Od. 6.73 ← ὅπλα ‘gear, harness’;
αἰτɛ˜ν ‘to ask (for)’ ← ∗αἰτο- ‘portion, share’ ← αἴνυσθαι ‘to take’ (Frisk s.v. αἰνέω).
In the absence of external cognates no single example can be reconstructed
securely for Proto-Greek, but the type is certainly inherited, since ∗-ε-jε/ο- cor-
responds perfectly to Vedic Skt -a-yá/ā́ -< PIE ∗-e-yé/ó- (note the absence of
lengthening by Brugmann’s Law before the ∗y, showing that the PIE vowel was
not ∗o).
Another large class is in ∗-α-jε/ο-. These must originally have been denomina-
tives of noun stems in long ∗-ᾱ-, but for the most part the ∗α of the verb stems
is short, apparently by analogy with the class in ∗-ε-jε/ο- (whereas in the aorist
²⁰ Att. ῥῑγῶν ‘to shiver’ was almost certainly modeled on ἱδρῶν (Frisk s.v. ῥῖγος). Whether any of
the Homeric present-stem forms in γελω-ε/ο- are denominative from γέλως is difficult to say; see
Chantraine (1973: 365–6) for discussion.


===== PDF PAGE 207 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 197
the analogy worked in the opposite direction—see 4.2.2 (iii) below). That short-
ening had not yet occurred in Proto-Greek, since forms with preserved ᾱ are
attested or inferrable for several dialects (Meister 1921: 90). Homeric examples
include:
τῑμᾶν ‘to honor’ < ∗τῑμα-jε/ο- ← τῑμᾱ́ (> Att.-Ion. τῑμή) ‘honor’;
βοᾶν ‘to shout’ ← βοᾱ́ (βοή) ‘shout’;
βιᾶσθαι ‘to overpower’ ← βίᾱ (Ion. βίη) ‘strength, force’;
iptv. 2sg. αὔδᾱ ‘speak!’ ← αὐδᾱ́ (αὐδή) ‘voice’.
This formation too must be inherited, since it reappears in Vedic (cf. Macdonell
1910: 400), in Germanic class II weak verbs, and in the Latin first conjugation,
though in all those languages the ∗ā is not shortened. At least one derived verb in
-ᾶν has a different origin, and it is the only one which has clear external cognates
(Watkins apud Tucker 1981: 20):
PIE ∗néwo- ‘new’ (cf. Hitt. nēwas, Lat. novos; Gk νέος ‘young’) → ∗néwa-h₂-
‘make new, renew’ (Hitt. 3sg. newahhi; Lat. novāre ‘to renew; to plow fallow
ground) >→ νεᾶν ‘to plow fallow ground’.
The derived meaning shared with the Latin word shows that this verb is inherited.
Though it looks exactly like a denominative in ∗-α-jε/ο-, it does not fit the usual
pattern of derivation at all: it is a factitive derived from a thematic adjective, exactly
like the Hittite hi-conjugation verb. How it acquired its attested shape in Greek
does not seem to be recoverable in any detail, but in some form or other it must
have been present in Proto-Greek.
The origins of the third group of ‘contract presents’, in ∗-ο-jε/ο-, are more com-
plex and in part disputed. The most important study of these stems is Tucker
(1981), whose discussion of this class of presents and their associated stems can
be summarized as follows. There are two derivational types in Homer. One is
derived from nouns and is instrumental in meaning, while the other is derived
from adjectives and is factitive (Tucker 1981: 16 with references). To the former
the attested presents derived from o-stems are χολõσθαι ‘be angry’ (twice in Il. 8;
χ´ολος ‘anger’), ῥυπ´οω ‘I am dirty’ (twice in the Odyssey; pl. ῥύπα ‘dirt’), θεειο˜υται
Od. 23.50 ‘he fumigates’ (θέειον ‘sulfur’), iptv. κάκου Od. 4.754 ‘afflict’ (nt. κακ´ον
‘evil’), and from nouns of other types γōνõσθαι ‘clasp the knees of, implore’ (γõνα
‘knees’), κορυφο˜υται Il. 4.426 ‘it is crested’ (κορυφή ‘crest’), and παχνο˜υται Il.
17.112 ‘is chilled’ (πάχνη ‘hoarfrost’). Mediopassive perfects are surprisingly com-
mon in this group of verbs in Homer and appear to be attested even in Mycenaean.
Since there is no comparable formation in other IE languages, Tucker suggests
plausibly that the perfects are actually the oldest members of these paradigms and


===== PDF PAGE 208 =====
198 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
are Greek innovations on which the rest of the paradigm was subsequently built
(Tucker 1981: 16–17). We will return to them in 4.2.3 (ii) below.
By contrast, the factitives never have perfects in Homer, and there are even fewer
present stems attested, namely σαõν ‘to save’ (∗σάος ‘safe’), γυμνο˜υσθαι Od. 6.222
‘to strip’ (γυμν´ος ‘naked), and probably δηϊ´οων ‘cutting down, slaying’ (δήϊος ‘hos-
tile’ or the like; Tucker 1981: 31 fn. 7). Tucker therefore accepts the widespread
view that these too are Greek innovations (pp. 15, 30 fn. 4) and suggests a fairly
complex scenario by which they might have developed from the inherited type
of νεᾶν (pp. 19–22). However, Dishington has made a persuasive case that the
Gothic factitives of the third weak class are cognate with the Greek factitives in ∗ -
ο-jε/ο- (Dishington 1976; see Ringe 2017: 204–5 on the phonology), and Melchert
(1997a: 136–7) suggests that a class of Anatolian denominatives might also be cog-
nate.²¹ It therefore seems likely that Greek inherited a class of factitive presents in
∗-o-yé/ó- as well. If that is true, we need to account for the rarity of such presents
in Homer; but that is not necessarily a challenge. Even counting their sigmatic
stems in -ωσ- and their perfects, this is by far the smallest of the ‘contract’ classes
in Homer; moreover, the fact that a large proportion of the epics is third-person
narrative militates against the appearance of present stems, even though Homer
does not hesitate to use imperfects instead of aorists when it is metrically conve-
nient. Thus the small number of factitive stems in ∗-ο-jε/ο- is plausibly a statistical
accident.
Two Attic-Ionic denominatives consistently exhibit a long ∗ᾱ before the original
suffix; in Attic they appear as πεινῆν ‘to be hungry’ and διψῆν ‘to be thirsty’. Both
exhibit a long vowel in Homer as well (πεινᾱ́ ων Il. thrice, πεινήμεναι Od. 20.137;
διψά̄ων Od. 11.584). It seems possible that these two stems, which must have been
learned early and form an obvious semantic pair, simply failed to undergo the ana-
logical shortening that affected most α-cοntract presents. There are several more
such stems in Homer, but as the syllable before their unexpected long vowel is
always heavy, we have to reckon with the possibility that these forms have been
adjusted to fit the meter (cf. Risch 1974: 322); another possibility is that they are
Aiolisms, as suggested by the obviously non-Ionic participles in -ᾱ́ ων (Meister
1921: 89).
Denominatives from most other types of vowel stems, such as Hom. μηνίɛ¯ν
‘be angry, rage’ (μῆνις ‘anger’) and κορθύεται Il. 9.7 ‘(the wave) rolls itself up’
(κ´ορθυς ‘sheaf ’ vel sim.) are uncommon and unimportant, with one exception:
presents in -εύɛ¯ν, at first derived from nouns in -εύς. (See 4.3.3 ad fin. for discus-
sion of this suffix.) The phonology of the denominative presents requires some
²¹ However, Vedic presents in -ā-yá/a ̄́-derived from o-stems, which could reflect ∗-o-yé/ó- with
lengthening of ∗o by Brugmann’s Law, do not seem to be connected with these formations; note espe-
cially that most examples are clearly not factitives derived from adjectives, a large number actually
being statives (Macdonell 1910: 399).


===== PDF PAGE 209 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 199
discussion. The noun suffix was originally ∗-ηϝ-, as is demonstrated by Homeric
βασιλή-, the stem before vocalic endings without exception; the short diphthong
of the nom. sg. and the dat. pl. reflects the working of Osthoff ’s Law, operating
either as a regular sound change (see 3.5.3) or as a phonological rule before it was
lost. The derived present stem must therefore originally have ended in ∗-ηϝ-jε/ο-,
which by OL yielded ∗-εϝ-jε/ο-. The outcome of this sequence by regular sound
change seems to have been -εjjε/ο- (see 5.2.2), and that is what we find in Elean, a
West Greek dialect; for instance, DGE 424, a 4th-century inscription, attests (l. 1)
φυγαδείην = φυγαδεύɛ¯ν ‘to exile, to banish’ and (l. 5, with lowering of ε to α after
ρ) κατιαραίων = καθιερεύων, usually ‘dedicating’ but in Elean apparently ‘inform-
ing’ or ‘bringing a charge’ (see Buck 1955: 125, 262–3). In other dialects (so far
as we have evidence) -ευ- has been leveled into the present stem from the aorist.
Homeric examples clearly derived from nouns in -εύς include:
βασιλεύɛ¯ν ‘be king, rule’ ← βασιλεύς ‘king’;
ἱερεύɛ¯ν ‘sacrifice’ ← ἱερεύς ‘priest’;
χάλκευον Il. 18.400 ‘I forged’ ← χαλκεύς ‘smith’.
But already in Homer’s time presents in -εύɛ¯ν had been derived from nouns of
other stem classes, e.g. ἀγορεύɛ¯ν ‘make a speech’ ← ἀγορή ‘assembly’. Though the
phonology of the Elean examples at least suggests that the first presents in ∗-ηϝ-
jε/ο- might date back to Proto-Greek, it is impossible to say how early any of the
various extensions of the formation occurred, given that most or all Greek dialects
remained in contact and could have borrowed innovations from one another.
Greek has created a considerable number of further denominative present suf-
fixes by resegmentation, of which the most important are -ιζε/ο-, -αζε/ο-, -αινε/ο-,
and -ῡνε/ο-, all with reflexes of ∗-ye/o-. So far as I can see, none of them can be
projected back into Proto-Greek with any confidence.
There are also deverbative presents in ∗-Vye/o-, at least one class of which was
inherited. In Indo-Iranian and Germanic a type of present with an o-grade root
and suffix ∗-éye/o- is well represented, and relics occur in other IE languages,
including Greek. Some are causative in meaning, while others appear to be itera-
tive. About half a dozen Greek examples have certain or probable stem-cognates
in other IE languages:
PIE ∗doḱéye/o- ‘cause to accept, make acceptable’ (Lat. docēre ‘to teach’) >
δοκɛ˜ν ‘to seem good’ (root ∗deḱ-, cf. Ion. δέκεσθαι);
PIE ∗spoḱéye/o- ‘keep looking, look intently’ (Skt mp. iptv. 2sg. spā´sáyasva ‘spy
out, detect’ RV I.176.3) >→ σκοπɛ˜ν ‘to look at, to examine’ (root ∗speḱ-, cf.
σκέπτεσθαι, Skt 3sg. pá´syati ‘(s)he sees’);
PIE ∗woǵʰéye/o- ‘cause to convey’ (Skt 3sg. vāháyati) > Hom. ὀχέεσθαι ‘to drive
(horses)’ Il. 10.403, 17.77;


===== PDF PAGE 210 =====
200 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗krotéye/o- ‘keep shaking, rattle’ (OCS krotiti ‘to break (a horse)’) > Hom.
ptc. κροτέοντες Il. 15.453 (root ∗kret-, cf. OHG redan ‘to sift’);
PIE ∗kowh₁éye/o- ‘pay close attention’ (Lat. cavēre²² ‘take care, beware’) > 2sg.
κοεῖς ‘you notice’ Anakreon 360.2 (LIV s.v. ∗(s)keu̯ h₁);
PIE ∗worséye/o- ‘make it rain’ (Skt 3sg. varṣáyati) > ō̓ ρɛ˜ν ‘to urinate’ (LIV s.v.
∗h₂u̯ ers);
PIE ∗srobʰéye/o- ‘keep slurping/drinking’ (Lat. sorbēre with analogical zero
grade of the root, see LIV s.v. ∗srebʰ) > ῥοφɛ˜ν.
It can be seen that these stems are more or less isolated derivationally in attested
Greek, and that some have undergone shifts in meaning; they are relics, not
the results of a derivational process that is still productive. It follows that even
examples without external stem-cognates must be relatively old, though of course
we cannot assert that any individual example already existed in Proto-Greek.
Other such stems made to clearly inherited roots include the following. Two were
originally causatives:
φοβɛ˜ν ‘to frighten’ ← Hom. ‘to put to flight’ ← φέβεσθαι ‘to flee’, root ∗bʰegʷ-
‘run away’ (cf. Lith. 3sg. bė́ ga ‘(s)he runs’);
σοβɛ˜ν ‘to scare away (birds)’ ← Hom. 2pl. σέβεσθε ‘you feel shame’ Il. 4.242 ←
∗‘yield, give way’, root ∗tyegʷ- (cf. Skt tyajati ‘(s)he abandons’).
Most, however, including less certain examples not adduced here, were iteratives:
φορɛ˜ν ‘to carry customarily, to wear’ ← φέρɛ¯ν ‘to carry’, root ∗bʰer- (see
4.2.1 (iv); the apparent stem-cognate Av. bāraiia-is causative rather than
iterative);
τρομɛ˜ν ‘to tremble’ ← τρέμɛ¯ν, root ∗trem- (see 4.2.1 (iv));
Hom. τροπɛ˜ν ‘to turn’ ← τρέπɛ¯ν, root ∗trep- (see 4.2.1 (iv));
Hom. ὀχέων ‘enduring’, ὀχέεσκον ‘I used to endure’ Od. 11.619²³ ← ἔχɛ¯ν ‘to hold’,
root ∗seǵʰ- (see 4.2.1 (iv));
Hom. ὑποκλοπέοιτο ‘(whether anyone) was lurking’ Od. 22.382 ← κλέπτɛ¯ν ‘to
steal, to do in secret’, root ∗klep- (see above);
ποθɛ˜ν ‘to long for’ ← ∗‘to keep asking for’ < ∗ gʷʰodʰéye/o-, root ∗ gʷʰedʰ- (see
the beginning of this section).
²² With av < pretonic ∗ow at a very early date, cf. Vine (2006).
²³ Considering that this stem is iterative, it seems reasonable to translate Od. 1.296–7
οὐδέ τί σε χρὴ
νηπιάας ὀχέειν, ἐπεὶ οὐκέτι τηλίκος ἐσσί.
as ‘and you don’t need to keep hanging on to childish ways, since you’re not that age any more’ (cf. W.
H. D. Rouse’s translation ‘you ought not to play about in the nursery any longer’).


===== PDF PAGE 211 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 201
One is attested in both functions:
epic ptc. πυρ-πολέοντας ‘tending the fires’ Od. 10.30, inf. πολεῖν ‘to plow’
Hesiod Works and Days 462 < ∗kʷoléye/o-, causative of ∗kʷel- ‘turn’;
Att. poet. πολɛ˜ν ‘to go all over (a place)’ < ∗kʷoléye/o-, iterative of ∗kʷel-.
Several other, roughly similar formations are also attested in Greek. A formation
with long ∗ō in the root and a suffix ∗-ie/o- might be of PIE date; a possible example
is Lat. sōpīre ‘to put to sleep’ (though see Weiss 2016 for counterarguments). But
examples are few and scattered: LIV lists only twenty-five for the whole family,
of which thirteen are marked as uncertain to one degree or another, and most
are securely attested in only one subgroup. In Greek the few clear examples have
adopted the suffix ∗-éye/o- of the short-vowel type:
Hom. πωλɛ˜σθαι ‘to go around, to go frequently’, iterative of ∗kʷel- ‘turn’;
ὠθɛ˜ν ‘to push’, iterative of ∗wedʰh₁- (cf. Skt aor. ávadʰīt ‘(s)he has killed’);
πωλɛ˜ν ‘to sell’ must also belong here (so Frisk s.v. πωλέω), though no good
root-cognate can be cited.
There are a handful of examples in ∗-αjε/ο-, and their origin is still more uncer-
tain. The presents ποτᾶσθαι and πωτᾶσθαι, both ‘to fly around’ and both attested
in Homer, offer support for the hypothesis that their root ended in the second
laryngeal in PIE, since they can be regular reflexes of ∗poth₂áye/o- (with under-
lying /é/) and ∗pṓth₂ie/o- (so LIV s.v. ∗peth₂); but ποτɛ˜σθαι, with no reflex of a
laryngeal, is Homeric too. Moreover, plausible evidence for the laryngeal is con-
fined to Greek (Hackstein 2002a: 140); for instance, note that the Skt root is pat-,
not the ‘patʰ-’ that would be expected if it had been laryngeal-final. There are also
examples of deverbatives with e-grade roots; the full range of types is laid out in
Schwyzer (1939: 717–20). The antiquity of these formations is unclear to me.
4.2.2 The development of aorist stems
4.2.2 (i) Root-aorists
Ancient Greek had fewer types of aorist stems; most have at least occasional
stem-cognates in other IE languages, though all have undergone important devel-
opments within the separate prehistory of Greek.
Root-aorists are already an unproductive relic type in Homer, but the epics
attest more stems than later Greek documents do. Many have unproblematic
stem-cognates in other IE languages and were clearly inherited:


===== PDF PAGE 212 =====
202 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗ gʷáh₂- ~ ∗ gʷh₂- ‘step’ (Skt 3sg. ágāt) > Dor. 3sg. ἔβᾱ, Hom. 3sg. ἔβη,
βῆ, 2du. βάτην, 3pl. ἔβαν, βάν < ∗ gʷh₂ánd (PIE 3pl. ∗-énd with laryngeal
coloring);
PIE ∗stáh₂- ~ ∗sth₂- ‘stand up’ (Skt 3sg. ástʰāt) > Dor. 3sg. ἔστᾱ, Hom. 3sg.
ἔστη, στῆ, 3pl. ἔσταν, στάν;
PIE ∗bʰúH- ‘become’ (Skt 3sg. ábʰūt) > 3sg. ἔφῡ;
PIE ∗dráh₂- ~ ∗dr̥ h₂- ‘run’ (Skt iptv. 3sg. drā́ tu) > Att. 3sg. ἀπ-έδρᾱ ‘(s)he ran
away’, cf. Hom. ptc. ἀποδρᾱ́ ς;
PIE ∗ǵnóh₃- ~ ∗ǵn̥ h₃- ‘recognize’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. nōvit ‘(s)he knows (someone)’)
> 3sg. ἔγνω;
PIE ∗dʰgʷʰéy- ~ ∗dʰgʷʰi- ‘perish’ (Skt iptv. 2sg. kṣidʰı̄́ ‘destroy!’ Samaveda
1.336; see LIV s.v. ∗dʰguh̯ei̯ ) > Hom. mp. 3sg. ἔφθιτο;
PIE ∗ḱléw- ~ ∗ḱlu- ‘hear’ (Skt iptv. 2sg. ´srudʰ´ı) > Hom. iptv. 2sg. ∗κλύθι (always
line-initial, hence written κλ˜υθι);
PIE ∗léwH- ~ ∗luH- ‘untie, release’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. luit ‘(s)he atoned for’) → ∗lu-
by resegmentation in Hom. mp. 3sg. λύτο ‘gave way, broke up’ (λ˜υτο Il. 24.1
by the same process as κλ˜υθι, see above);
PIE ∗kʷréyh₂- ~ ∗kʷrih₂- ‘buy’ (Toch. B pret. 1pl. ka¨ryāmtte ‘we bought’) >
Hom. 3sg. πρίατο;
PIE ∗pléh₁- ~ ∗pl̥h₁- ‘fill’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. implēvit) > Hom. mp. 3sg. πλῆτο ‘it was
filled’.
Note that in the last stem Hom. πλη- can reflect zero-grade ∗pl̥h₁- (and probably
does, since the stem is mediopassive); in fact regular sound change made the full
grade and zero grade of the root identical, and the same is true of γνω- and δρᾱ-.
That might have contributed to the leveling which has affected βᾱ- and στᾱ-, in
which most dual and plural forms exhibit a full-grade root instead of the expected
zero grade even in Homer; the fact that φῡ- had never exhibited ablaut might
also have been a contributing factor. In one root an inherited zero grade has been
generalized:
PIE ∗télh₂- ~ ∗tl̥ h₂-‘lift’ (Old Lat. subj. 3sg. attulat) > ∗τελα- (cf. Hom. τελαμων ´
‘shield-strap’) ~ τλᾱ-, the latter in 1sg. ἔτλᾱν ‘I have endured’, Pindar Isth-
mian VII.37, and in Hom. 3sg. ἔτλη, τλῆ, etc., to which 3pl. ἔτλαν (Il. 21.608)
was formed by rule.
Homer also preserves a number of inherited consonant-final root-aorists:²⁴
∗h₃ór- ~ ∗h₃r̥ - ‘rise’ (Skt 3sg. prá ārta ‘it came forth’ RV IV.1.12, Av. iptv. 2sg.
uz-ārəšuua ‘arise!’) > Hom. 3sg. ὦρτο ‘it arose’ (augmented);
²⁴ But ἐλέγμην ‘I was counted’ Od. 9.335, λέκτο ‘he counted’ Od. 4.451 could be archaic s-aorists
with ∗-s- lost by sound change between consonants (Harðarson 1993: 205); so far as I can see, the
same could be true of κατέπηκτο ‘it stuck (in the ground)’ Il. 11.378. On δέκτο, see fn. 1 above.


===== PDF PAGE 213 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 203
∗ár- ~ ∗ r̥ - ‘fit’ (Skt 3pl. sám aranta ‘they met’ RV VII.25.1, thematized; cf. Hitt.
natta āra ‘it isn’t right/fitting’) > Hom. ptc. ἄρμενος ‘fitting’;
∗sál- ~ ∗sl̥- ‘leap’ (Skt 3sg. ásarat ‘it flowed’, thematized (?)) > ∗hαλ- > Hom.
3sg. ἆλτο (Aiolic?; see Chantraine 1973: 482), ptc. ἐπι-άλμενος.
Two such stems require some discussion. For PIE ∗legʰ- ‘lie down’ LIV recon-
structs a simple thematic present, but the root was eventive (the corresponding
stative was ∗ḱey-) and should therefore have had an unaffixed aorist. It should fol-
low that Hom. aor. 3sg. λέκτο ‘(s)he lay down’ is inherited, even though the only
stem-cognate is OCS 3sg. -lezˇe (thematized); Hesykhios’ λέχεται. κοιμᾶται must
be an innovation, not necessarily an early one. For Hom. aor. 3sg. μίκτο ‘he min-
gled’ (intrans.) there are no external stem-cognates, but the fact that a present in
∗-sḱé/ó- is reconstructable for PIE and actually survives in Greek (see 4.2.1 (iii))
suggests that this affixless aorist is also inherited. An athematic form attested only
in Attic and Cyprian²⁵ that must nevertheless be old is iptv. 3sg. πῖθι ‘have a drink!’;
otherwise the aorist has been thematized as πιɛ˜ν.
A couple of Homeric root-aorists are more questionable. Since the Homeric
present σεύεσθαι ‘to rush, to hurry’ has no stem-cognates, we might expect the
aorist ἔσσυτο to be the inherited member of the paradigm. But I have argued
elsewhere that it is only the sparsely attested root-present σε˜υται ‘is hurrying’
(Sophokles Trakhiniai 645) that has an indisputable stem-cognate in Vedic pres.
ptc. cyávānas ‘moving, in motion’ (Ringe 2012: 128 with references), and if that is
true, the root-aorist must be a Greek innovation. (See further below on the pro-
cess by which innovative affixless aorists may have been created.) In the case of
Homeric aor. χύτο ‘it gushed, it flowed’ and pres. χέɛ¯ν < ∗χέϝε/ο- ‘to pour’ no
stem-cognates can be cited; the reduplicated Skt present 3sg. juhóti ‘(s)he sacri-
fices’ suggests that the Greek aorist is original and the Greek present was originally
an aorist subjunctive, like λείπɛ¯ν (see 4.2.1 (iv) above),²⁶ but other scenarios are
possible.
Three common root-aorists have undergone a surprising development in
Greek: they exhibit a suffix -κ- in the indicative active singular, but not (origi-
nally) in other forms. Thus for ‘put’ we find in Homer act. ind. 3sg. ἔθηκε but 3pl.
ἔθεσαν, subj. 3sg. θήῃ, opt. 3sg. θείη, iptv. 2sg. θές, inf. θεῖναι ~ θέμεναι, ptc. -θείς,
and mediopassive ind. 3sg. ἔθετο, etc.; so also δωκ- ~ δο- ‘give’ and ἡκ- ~ ἑ- ‘send,
throw’. Nor are the forms with ∗-k- confined to Greek; ἔθηκε is plausibly related to
Lat. pf. 3sg. fēcit ‘(s)he made’ and late Phrygian αδδακετ ‘does (something bad) to’,
while ἡκ- recalls Lat. pf. 3sg. iēcit ‘(s)he threw’. But in other IE languages the ∗-k-
is part of the root, so far as we can tell from Lat. facere ‘to make’, iacere ‘to throw’,
Venetic vhagsto ‘(s)he made’. Moreover, most IE languages exhibit only forms with-
out ∗-k-; typical are Skt 3sg. ádʰāt ‘(s)he put’, ádāt ‘(s)he gave’ and (for ∗h₁yeh₁-)
²⁵ Masson 207b, 346, 347.
²⁶ Or possibly constructed to the Greek s-aorist (LIV s.v. ∗ g ̑ʰeu ̯).


===== PDF PAGE 214 =====
204 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
Lycian adi = Toch. A yaṣ ‘(s)he makes’. Finally, an extended root such as ∗dʰeh₁k-
must be a post-PIE innovation, since it violates the constraint against having a
breathy-voiced stop and a voiceless stop in the same root (see 2.2.1). What are we
to make of this configuration of facts?
The extended root most widely attested is ∗dʰeh₁k-. That it appears both in
Greek and in Phrygian is no surprise, given the similarities between those lan-
guages, but its appearance also in Italic can only mean that it was created in the
common ancestor of the non-Anatolian, non-Tocharian daughters.²⁷ Apparently
Greek inherited both a root θη- ~ θε- and a root θηκ- ~ ∗θεκ- in the meaning ‘put’; it
may or may not have inherited a reflex of ∗h₁yeh₁k-, since both Gk ἡκ- and Lat. iēc-
could have been constructed to match the reflexes of ∗dʰeh₁k- by lexical analogy.
Moreover, competition between θη- and θηκ- might actually be attested: though
most dialects exhibit active indic. 3sg. ἔθηκε, ἀνέθηκε, etc., an alternative form
ἀνέθɛ¯ is clearly attested in early Boiotian inscriptions (Dubois 1986a). Sara Kim-
ball has demonstrated how the two paradigms could have been conflated, starting
from expected sound-change outcomes:
1sg. ∗édʰēm > ∗ἔθην ἔθηκα < ∗édʰeh₁km̥
2sg. ∗édʰeh₁s > ∗ἔθης ∗ἔθηξ < ∗édʰeh₁ks
3sg. ∗édʰeh₁t > ἔθη ἔθη < ∗édʰeh₁kt
(cf. Kimball 1991: 142, 150)
Though the details of the process are not recoverable, the fact that the pivotal active
indic. 3sgs. both should have become ἔθη by regular sound change, and the sur-
vival both of that form and of 1sg. ἔθηκα, make a confusion of the two paradigms
by native learners highly plausible. The resulting pattern may have been extended
to ἡκ- ~ ἑ- and was certainly extended to δωκ- ~ δο-. The survival of ἔθη (spelled
-εθɛ¯) in Boiotian, a dialect notable for its archaisms in verb inflection, shows that
this process had not occurred or at least was not complete in Proto-Greek, though
it was apparently complete in Mycenaean, to judge from te-ke, do-ke, and their
compounds.
4.2.2 (ii) Thematic aorists
How early the thematic aorist developed is still an open question, but at least it can
be said that one example is widely attested in the IE family:
Toch. B lac ‘(s)he went out’ = OIr. luid ‘(s)he went’ = Gk ἤλυθε ‘(s)he came’ <
∗h₁ludʰéd, augmented ∗é h₁ludʰed ‘(s)he arrived’ (vel sim.).
²⁷ The element ∗-k-, whatever its function might originally have been, could actually be somewhat
older, since it appears in the Tocharian non-present stem ∗(s)taka- ‘be’, evidently an extension of PIE
‘stand’ (cf. Toch. A subj. 1sg. tām ‘I will be’ vs. iptv. 2sg. pa¨ṣtāk ‘be!’ and TB subj. /táka-/, pret. /taká-/).
For further discussion, see Hackstein (2002a: 136 with fn. 1).


===== PDF PAGE 215 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 205
Even this example might have been a root-aorist in PIE (see LIV s.v. ∗h₁leu̯ dʰ ,
where the problem of determining which forms are cognate is discussed and the
possibility of multiple roots is raised in the notes). All other thematic aorists show
clear signs of secondary thematization (see especially the discussion of Cardona
1960); even the equation Gk ἔϝιδε ‘(s)he caught sight of ’ = Skt ávidat ‘(s)he found’
is undercut by Lat. vīdit ‘(s)he saw’, whose full grade forces the reconstruction
of an ablauting athematic paradigm ∗wéyd- ~ ∗wid- ‘catch sight of ’. A few aorists
were clearly thematized after the Proto-Greek period, since both athematic and
thematic forms occur in Homer (indic. always ἔκλυε, etc., but iptv. always κλ˜υθι,
κλ˜υτε; ἔφθιεν ‘he ate (his heart) out’, Il. 18.446, but mp. usually ἔφθιτο; ἔκτανε
‘slew’, etc., beside ἔκτα, etc., the latter backformed to mp. κτάσθαι; usually ὦρτο,
etc., but ὤρετο Il. thrice, and only subj. ὄρηται (Od. thrice), opt. ὄροιτο (Od.
14.522).)²⁸ Thematic πιɛ˜ν ‘to take a drink’ must also be a post-PGk innovation,
given the survival of iptv. 2sg. πῖθι (see 4.2.2 (i)).
A number of Greek thematic aorists have stem-cognates elsewhere, either ath-
ematic or thematic, showing that they are inherited. So far as can be determined,
most had already been thematized in Proto-Greek. In addition to the stems
adduced above, note the following:
PIE ∗léykʷ- ~ ∗likʷ- ‘leave behind’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. līquit) → ∗likʷé/ó- (Arm. 3sg.
elikʰ) > λιπɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗bʰéwg- ~ ∗bʰug- ‘run away’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. fūgit) → ∗bʰugé/ó- > φυγɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗ gʰrawH- ~ ∗ gʰruH- (?; see LIV s.v. ∗ gʰreh₁u̯ ) ‘run into’ (Lat. pf. 3sg. in-
gruit ‘(s)he rushed into’) → ∗ gʰrawé/ó- > Hom. 3sg. ἔχραε ‘(s)he attacked;
(s)he was eager to’;
PIE ∗bʰéwdʰ- ~ ∗bʰudʰ- ‘become alert’ (Skt. inj. 3pl. budʰánta ‘they wake up’)
→ ∗bʰudʰé/ó- > πυθέσθαι ‘to learn about’;
PIE ∗Hné(n)ḱ- ~ ∗Hn̥ ḱ- ‘bring’²⁹ (Skt 3sg. ā́ naṭ ‘(s)he has reached’) >→ ἐνεγκɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗dérḱ- ~ ∗dr̥ ḱ- ‘look at’ (Skt 3pl. ádr̥ ´sran) → ∗dr̥ ḱé/ó- > Hom. δρακɛ˜ν ‘to
look (at)’;
PIE ∗térp- ~ ∗tr̥ p- ‘have enough of ’ (Skt neut. ptc. as adv. tr̥ pát ‘to satiety’) →
∗tr̥ pé/ó- > Hom. subj. ταρπ ωμεθα³⁰´ ‘we are refreshed’;
²⁸ It is difficult to say how many of these stems are artificial poetic creations. At least ὤρετο, always in
ὅτε δ’ ὤρετο immediately before the bucolic diaeresis, looks suspiciously like a form created by formu-
laic modification (see Chantraine 1973: 392 and the discussion of Roth 1990: 62–3); the subjunctive
and optative forms might actually have been part of the athematic paradigm.
²⁹ The Greek stem suggests initial ∗h₁, whereas OIr. pf. tánaic ‘(s)he arrived, (s)he came’ suggests
∗h₂ (or, in principle, ∗h₃). Possibly we need to recognize two roots (so LIV s.vv. ∗h₁nek ̑, ∗h₂nek ̑), but
that seems less economical than positing an assimilation of vowels in adjacent syllables—most likely
in Greek. I accept the traditional view that the internal nasal in the Greek form is a purely phonetic
development, not a relic of reduplication, because it appears in a large number of forms in multiple
daughters (e.g. pf. 3sg. ∗He-Hnónḱ-e > Skt ānáṃ´sa, OIr. t-ánaic, the latter with /gʲ/ < ∗gg < ∗nk).
³⁰ For expected ∗τραπ- by leveling on pres. τέρπεσθαι.


===== PDF PAGE 216 =====
206 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗pérh₃- ~ ∗ pr̥ h₃- ‘grant’ (Skt iptv. 2sg. purdˉʰ´ı‘give!’) >→ Hom. 3sg. π´ορε;
PIE ∗h₂ár- ~ ∗h₂r̥ - ‘get a share of ’ (Arm. 3sg. aṙ ‘(s)he took’) → ἀρέ/´ο- in Hom.
3pl. ἄροντο ‘they have won (prizes)’;
PIE ∗kʷél- ~ ∗kʷl̥- ‘turn (once)’ (Arm. 3sg. ełew ‘(s)he became’) → πλέ/´ο- in
Hom. 3sg. ἔπλετο ‘it has become’.
A larger number of thematic aorists are shown to be comparatively old by the fact
that their presents are affixed, or there is no present (or a suppletive present); if
the root is inherited, it is very likely that the unaffixed aorist was too. In addition
to πταρɛ˜ν ‘to sneeze’ (pres. πτάρνυσθαι), ἱκέσθαι ‘to arrive’ (pres. ἱκνɛ˜σθαι, Hom.
ἱκᾱ́ νɛ¯ν), τεμɛ˜ν ‘to cut’ (pres. τάμνɛ¯ν), καμɛ˜ν ‘to get tired’ (pres. κάμνɛ¯ν), δακɛ˜ν ‘to
bite’ (pres. δάκνɛ¯ν), and χαδɛ˜ν ‘to grasp’ (pres. χανδάνɛ¯ν), which were adduced in
4.2.1 (ii), and τεκɛ˜ν ‘to give birth’ (pres. τίκτɛ¯ν), γενέσθαι ‘to be born, to become’
(pres. γίγνεσθαι), χανɛ˜ν ‘to gape’ (pres. χάσκɛ¯ν), θορɛ˜ν ‘to leap’ (pres. θρωσκɛ¯ν), ´
θανɛ˜ν ‘to die’ (pres. θνήσκɛ¯ν), and Hom. τορɛ˜ν ‘to pierce’ (pres. Att. τιτρ ωσκɛ¯ν´
‘to wound’), which were adduced in 4.2.1 (iii), the following cases seem especially
clear:
PIE ∗h₁ger- ‘wake up’, stative pf. ∗h₁geh₁góre (Skt. jāgā́ ra) in aor. ἐγρέσθαι, pf.
ἐγρηγορέναι;
PIE ∗bʰag- ‘share’ (Skt pres. 3sg. bʰájati ‘(s)he distributes’) in aor. φαγɛ˜ν ‘to eat’;
PIE ∗drem- ‘run’ (Khotanese 3sg. drema¨te ‘(s)he drives away’, see LIV s.v.) in
aor. δραμɛ˜ν;
PIE ∗h₂algʷʰ- ‘earn’ (Skt pres. 3sg. árhati ‘(s)he deserves’) in aor. 1sg. ἦλφον ‘I
earned’ Il. 21.79, pres. ἀλφάνɛ¯ν in Attic drama.
Even if external cognates for the root are sparse or doubtful, widely attested the-
matic aorists with affixed presents (or no present) are reasonably likely to go back
to Proto-Greek. In addition to ἁμαρτɛ˜ν ‘to miss (a mark), to make a mistake’
(pres. ἁμαρτάνɛ¯ν), αἰσθέσθαι ‘to perceive’ (pres. αἰσθάνεσθαι), βλαστɛ˜ν ‘to sprout’
(pres. βλαστάνɛ¯ν), κατα-δαρθɛ˜ν ‘to fall asleep’ (Hom. 3sg. ἔδραθε; pres. κατα-
δαρθάνɛ¯ν), ὀλισθɛ˜ν ‘to slip’ (pres. ὀλισθάνɛ¯ν), χαδɛ˜ν ‘to grasp’ (pres. χανδάνɛ¯ν),
λαχɛ˜ν ‘to get by lot’ (pres. λαγχάνɛ¯ν), and μαθɛ˜ν ‘to learn’ (pres. μανθάνɛ¯ν),
adduced in 4.2.1 (ii), and μολɛ˜ν ‘to come, to go’ (pres. βλ ωσκɛ´¯ν) and παθɛ˜ν ‘to
experience’ (pres. πάσχɛ¯ν), adduced in 4.2.1 (iii), one might mention:
Hom. 3sg. κίε ‘(s)he went (away)’, pres. κῑ́νυντο ‘they were moving’, thematized
κῑνɛ˜ν (see 4.2.1 (ii));
ἀπ-ολέσθαι ‘to perish’, pres. ἀπ-´ολλυσθαι (cf. Lat. ab-olēre ‘to wipe out’?);
βαλɛ˜ν ‘to hit (with a missile), to throw’, pres. βάλλɛ¯ν (cf. OIr. 3sg. at.baill ‘(s)he
dies’?);


===== PDF PAGE 217 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 207
λαβɛ˜ν ‘to take hold of ’, East Argolic ptc. λhαβṓν DGE 116, pres. Hom. λάζεσθαι,
root ∗hλαγʷ-;
ἀγρέσθαι ‘to assemble (intr.)’ (but Hom. 3pl. ἀγέροντο, suggesting an original
ablauting root-present, LIV s.v. ∗h₂ger), pres. ἀγɛ̄́ ρɛ¯ν;
Hom. λιτέσθαι ‘to beg, to beseech’, pres. λίσσεσθαι;
φάε (∗φάϝε) ‘(dawn) appeared’ Od. 14.502, Hom. pres. πιφαυσκέμεν ‘to light
(a fire), to show’;
ἑλɛ˜ν ‘to take’ (cf. Goth. saljan ‘to sacrifice’, OE sellan ‘to give’?).
However, this line of argument cannot be pushed too far; for instance, ἀπ-εχθέσθαι
‘to incur hatred’ (pres. ἀπ-εχθάνεσθαι) was obviously made to a ‘root’ extracted
from ἐχθρ´ος ‘hostile’, a process which cannot be dated with any confidence.
Quite different from all the above are paradigms with zero-grade thematic
aorists and full-grade presents, of which only the presents have secure stem-
cognates in other IE languages. I have argued elswhere that those aorists are
specifically Greek creations (Ringe 2012: 125–31). A few of the corresponding
presents were originally athematic, and it’s conceivable that their aorists arose from
the ablauting present by paradigm split, though the details of such a process are
beyond recovery. But I suspect that most of these aorists were formed on the model
of pairs like λείπɛ¯ν: λιπɛ˜ν, in which the present was originally an aorist subjunctive
(see 4.2.1 (iv)). At least the following are almost certainly Greek innovations, one
way or another:
Hom. ἐπι-σπɛ˜ν ‘to meet (death or fate)’, μετα-σπων ´ ‘following’: pres. ἕπει ‘(evil)
besets’ Od. 12.209, ἔφ-επε ‘he was driving’, ἀμφί-επον ‘they took care of ’, etc.
←< PIE ∗sép- ~ ∗sp- ‘take care of ’, cf. Gāthā-Av. 3sg. haptī;
Hom. 3sg. τύχε ‘he/it happened to hit’, later τυχɛ˜ν ‘to hit (a mark); to happen to’:
pres. Hom. τεύχɛ¯ν ‘to fashion, to make (as a craftsman)’ ←< PIE ∗dʰéwgʰ-
~ ∗dʰugʰ- ‘produce’, cf. Skt 3sg. dógdʰi ‘(s)he milks’, mp. duhé ‘it produces
milk’; the Greek forms exhibit paradigm split;
Hom. 3sg. ἔτραπε ‘(s)he turned (it)’, ἐτράπετο ‘(s)he turned’ (intrans.): pres.
τρέπɛ¯ν ←< PIE ∗trép- ~ ∗tr̥ p-, cf. Hitt. 3sg. teripzi ‘(s)he plows’;
σπέσθαι ‘to follow’: pres. ἕπεσθαι < PIE mp. ∗sékʷ-e/o-, cf. Skt. 3sg sácate, Lat.
sequī;
σχɛ˜ν ‘to take hold of, to get’: pres. ἔχɛ¯ν ‘to hold, to have’ < ∗hεχε/ο- <
PIE ∗séǵʰ-e/o-, cf. Skt 3sg. sáhate ‘(s)he prevails’;
ἐπι-πτέσθαι ‘to fly at’ Il. 4.126 (and other cpds.): pres. πέτεσθαι < PIE ∗pét-e/o-,
cf. Skt 3sg. pátati, Lat. petere ‘to go for, to seek’;
Hom. πιθέσθαι ‘to obey’: pres. πείθɛ¯ν ‘to persuade’ < PIE ∗bʰéydʰ-e/o- ‘trust’,
cf. Lat. fīdere, Goth. beidan ‘to wait for’;
Hom. 3sg. ἤρυγεν ‘he bellowed’ Il. 20.403, 404: pres. ἐρεύγεσθαι ‘to belch, to
bellow’ < PIE ∗h₁réwg-e/o- ‘belch’, cf. Lat. ē-rugereˉ;
ἀπο-παρδɛ˜ν ‘to fart’: pres. πέρδεσθαι < PIE mp. ∗pérd-e/o-, cf. Skt 3sg. pardate.


===== PDF PAGE 218 =====
208 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
A couple of further examples, less certain because of the sparsity of cognates, are
listed in Ringe (2012: 126–7).
A final category of simple thematic aorists are onomatopoeic, often occurring
in paradigms that contain a stative perfect but no present (or an obviously derived
present). In such cases the aorist is almost certainly the oldest member of the
paradigm, but just how old any individual example might be is indeterminable.
Homeric examples include λάκε ‘it crashed, (the bones) crunched’ Il. thrice beside
pf. ptc. λεληκ ως´ ‘shrieking’ Il. 22.141; ptc. μακ ων´ ‘groaning, with a groan’ beside
pf. ptc. μεμηκ ως´ ‘screaming’ Il. 10.362; μύκε ‘(the shield) made a hollow sound’ Il.
20.260, μύκον ‘(the gates) groaned’ thrice beside pf. ἀμφι-μέμῡκεν ‘it echoes’ Od.
10.227, plup. μεμʋ̄́ κει ‘(the meat) was mooing’ Od. 12.395 and pres. ptc. μῡκ ωμεναι´
‘mooing’ Od. 10.413; ἀν-έκραγον ‘I have blurted it out’ Od. 14.467.
Reduplicated thematic aorists are a small but conspicuous group in the Homeric
poems; a couple also occur in later Greek. They seem to have had diverse origins.
One example demonstrably dates back to the last common ancestor of Greek
and Indo-Iranian:
PIE ∗wekʷ- ‘speak, say’, aor. ∗wé-wk-e/o-,³¹ augmented 3sg. ∗é wewked (Skt
ávocat) → ∗é wewkʷed (with the labiovelar leveled in from other forms) >
∗ἔϝευκʷε > ∗ἔϝεικʷε (by dissimilation) > Hom. ἔειπε.
Also probably inherited is Hom. ἤραρε ‘(s)he fit (it)’, ptc. ἀραρ ων,´ etc. (ten times
in Homer), which matches the Armenian thematic aorist 3sg. arar ‘(s)he made’
(Bendahman 1993: 83). The stem is normally transitive (see the discussion of Ben-
dahman 1993: 80–2 on exceptions) and thus contrasts with the fossilized participle
ἄρμενος ‘fitted’ (thrice).
Three further Homeric examples of similar shape are relatively old, perhaps
Proto-Greek, though at least one must have been a specifically Greek creation.
The PIE root-present 3sg. ∗ gʷʰénti ‘(s)he hits, (s)he kills’ is well attested in Hitt.
kuēnzi, Skt hánti, and Av. jaiṇti; it survives in Homeric Greek remodeled as ∗ gʷʰén-
ye/o- > θɛ¯νέμεναι ‘to smite’ (see 4.2.1 (v)). Strikingly, most of the languages in
which it is attested, directly or indirectly, exhibit no stem that could reflect an
inherited aorist (see LIV s.v. ∗ guh̯en); the Skt aorist is suppletive ávadʰīt. Hom.
Gk aor. πεφνέμεν < ∗χʷe-χʷν-ε/ο- is therefore almost certainly a Greek creation,
though its paradigmatic relationship to θɛ¯νέμεναι shows that it arose before the
split of labiovelars into labials and dentals and could therefore be Proto-Greek.³²
A similar but more obscure case is ἔτετμε ‘(s)he encountered, (s)he overtook’ eight
times beside pres. 3sg. τέμει ‘it [the plow] reaches (the boundary-furrow)’ Il. 13.707
(Chantraine 1973: 309); since external cognates are uncertain we cannot say with
³¹ With automatic unrounding of ∗kʷ next to ∗ w.
³² The analysis of Av. -jaγnat is too uncertain for it to be accepted as a cognate stem; see LIV, loc.
cit., for discussion.


===== PDF PAGE 219 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 209
any certainty how old these stems are, but the fact that the paradigm is sparsely
attested even in Homer suggests that it too might be of Proto-Greek date. The
final example is more puzzling. Hom. aor. ἐκέκλετο ‘(s)he called’ has long been
considered part of the same paradigm as pres. κέλεσθαι ‘to tell (someone to do
something)’, though the aorist mostly governs the dative while the present governs
the accusative (see the discussion of Bendahman 1993: 110–12, 114). Of course
a single paradigm might have been split lexically some time before the composi-
tion of the epics, or modification of inherited formulas containing an obsolete verb
might eventually have led to the observed pattern. Deriving the aorist stem from
a root ∗kleh₁- ‘call’ (Bendahman 1993: 112–14, LIV s.v.) raises further problems,
since the disappearance of the laryngeal is difficult to motivate. In any case outside
cognates are problematic (see LIV s.v. ∗kel), but the shape and distribution of this
aorist suggest that it is an archaism within Greek (so Bendahman, loc. cit.).
Another reduplicated aorist, common to all the Greek dialects (so far as our
evidence goes), was almost certainly created by lexical analogy. Though the aorist
ἐνεγκɛ˜ν ‘to bring’ is not etymologically reduplicated, it looks as though it were;
it must be the model for ἀγαγɛ˜ν ‘to lead’ (so Bendahman 1993: 55–6 with refer-
ences). Though creation of a new stem by lexical analogy is always a surprise, there
are several reasons to accept this scenario (Bendahman, loc. cit.):
1) no other IE language has an inherited aorist for this verb, only the thematic
present (Gk ἄγɛ¯ν) being shared (LIV s.v. 1. ∗h₂eg̑ );
2) the idiom ἄγɛ¯ν καὶ φέρɛ¯ν ‘to plunder’ (lit. ‘to drive (off ) and carry (away)’)
shows that the two verbs were semantically linked;
3) in the Hellenistic period the perfect ἐνηνοχέναι ‘to have carried/brought’
was evidently the model for ∗ἀγηγοχέναι > ἀγηοχέναι (by dissimilatory
loss) ‘to have led’.
The largest group of reduplicated thematic aorists are constructed to light roots
of the shape CVC-; they are practically confined to epic language. This group has
been compared repeatedly to the Sanskrit reduplicated aorist, which is causative
in function (Whitney 1889: 308–9), and to the Tocharian causative aorist, which
is reduplicated in Toch. A and exhibits evidence of once having been so in Toch. B
(see e.g. Kim 2003, Malzahn 2010: 170–89, both with references). But these Greek
aorists have no certain stem-cognates in other IE languages—none at all³³—and
while there are more than a dozen such stems, no more than three are clearly
causatives. For our purposes the following observations seem appropriate.
Since reduplicated causative aorists and preterites do occur in other IE lan-
guages, it seems reasonable to adopt the working hypothesis that Greek inherited
such a formation, though it is possible that none of the inherited examples survive
³³ That τεταγ ων´ ‘having seized’ (Il. 1.591, 15.23) is cognate with Lat. tetigisse ‘to have touched’ is
very uncertain, as LIV admits s.v. ∗teh₂g fn. 3.


===== PDF PAGE 220 =====
210 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
to be attested. If we ask which attested stems might conceivably be such survivals,
by far the best candidate is Hom. δέδαε ‘(s)he taught’ (see the discussion of
Bendahman 1993: 69–71). It is unarguably the causative that corresponds to Hom.
δαήμεναι ‘to learn’ and is clearly an archaism, since even in Homer it is beginning
to be replaced by δίδαξε, the innovative sigmatic aorist that took over its function
in later Greek; moreover, its root was inherited (see LIV s.v. ∗dens). If any PGk
reduplicated causative aorist survives, this is it. Also clearly causative is subj. 3pl.
λελάχωσι Il. thrice, 2pl. λελάχητε Il. 23.76 ‘give someone a share of (fire by crema-
tion)’, since the usual aorist λαχɛ˜ν means ‘get a share of ’ and there is no difference
of voice between the forms (Bendahman 1993: 61–2); but in this case even the
root has no cognates outside Greek.
A more complex case is ἐκλέλαθον ‘they made him forget completely’ Il. 2.600,
λελάθηι ‘he may make him forget’ Il. 15.60. The corresponding mediopassive
λελαθέσθαι, of which forms occur seven times in the poems, could mean ‘make
oneself forget’ (so Bendahman 1993: 63–4), but could as well mean simply ‘forget’,
so that the causative function might appear to be expressed by the active voice.
But while mediopassive forms of other stems of this verb do also mean ‘forget’, the
active forms normally mean ‘escape the notice of ’; the only other causative forms
are the gnomic aorist ἐπέλησεν ‘it makes one forget’ Od. 20.85, a sigmatic aorist that
is unique for this verb, and ἐκ δέ με πάντων | ληθάνει ὅσσ’ ἔπαθον ‘and makes me
forget all that I have suffered’ Od. 7.220–1, a unique present stem that combines
the full-grade root of λήθɛ¯ν and the nasal-suffix of λανθάνɛ¯ν. Both these stems are
certainly late innovations, and the two active forms of λελαθε/ο- could be too. On
the other hand, the reduplicated aorist could have been created as a causative, and
its mediopassive forms would then automatically mean either ‘make oneself for-
get’ or just ‘forget’. Once again a decision seems unattainable because the verb has
no clear cognates in other IE languages.
Other potential causatives seem to me less certain. For instance, the phrase
ἀμπεπαλὼν προΐει means ‘he Xed and threw’ (Il. eight times, Od. 24.522) or iptv.
‘X and throw!’ (Od. 24.519), and the object is always a spear (usually δολιχ´οσκιον
ἔγχος, but δ´ορυ Il. 20.438), so ἀμπεπαλ ων´ must be whatever you do with a spear
just before you throw it. It could mean ‘having lifted’, and in that case it could be a
causative to ἀνέπαλτο ‘he sprang up’ (Il. thrice); but the difference in voice could
account for that, so reduplication does not necessarily mark causative function in
this participle.
The case of λελαθε/ο- (see above) suggests how non-causative reduplicated
aorists might have been created even if the original function of the formation
was causative. Greek is notorious for pressing the voice opposition into service
to express causativity or transitivity. For instance, both Skt tı´ṣṭʰati and Lat. sis-
tere are intransitive, though active, but in Greek the active ἱστάναι is transitive
(or causative) ‘to stand (something) up’; Lat. fīdere means ‘to trust’ and Goth. bei-
dan ‘to wait for’, but in Greek it is mediopassive πείθεσθαι that means ‘to trust,


===== PDF PAGE 221 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 211
to obey’, active πείθɛ¯ν having acquired the causative meaning ‘to persuade’. Under
the circumstances it is not surprising that while the aorist of πείθεσθαι is usually
πιθέσθαι, that of πείθɛ¯ν is usually πεπιθɛ˜ν³⁴—and in the absence of aorist stem-
cognates in other IE languages, there is more than one way in which that situation
could have come about. This is another reason why we should be reluctant to claim
that any of these stems existed in Proto-Greek.
One reduplicated aorist, however, might preserve a trace of its prehistory. It
seems clear that τετυκεῖν ‘to prepare (a meal for others)’ Od. 15.77, 94, τετυκέσθαι
‘to prepare (one’s own meal)’³⁵ belong with τεύχɛ¯ν ‘to make, to fashion’, but the
consistent root-final -κ- is anomalous. The obvious source would be assimilation
to a following ∗ s or ∗t, but that could have occurred only if the stem had originally
been athematic.³⁶ Unfortunately that inference leads no further.
Reduplicated aorists of other types (e.g. Hom. ἄλαλκε ‘(s)he warded off ’, ἐνένῑπε
and ἠνῑ́παπε ‘(s)he rebuked’, etc.) seem to be Greek innovations of uncertain date;
some might be artificial creations of the oral epic tradition (cf. Roth 1990: 63,
Bendahman 1993: 100–8).
4.2.2 (iii) Sigmatic aorists
This is the fully productive active and middle aorist in Greek. For that reason the
Proto-Greek status of any given example can be established with certainty only
by outside stem-cognates or archaic features of inflection; other sigmatic aorists
can be later creations. On the other hand, the formation and/or the paradigmatic
relationships of numerous examples argue that they are relatively old and could
be Proto-Greek.
Until late in the 20th century it was believed that the PIE s-aorist was a rel-
atively late development, both because few examples were well attested in more
than two daughters and because its ablaut made no sense in terms of PIE patterns
then known. Since then the Tocharian languages have added substantially to the
number of reconstructable s-aorist stems (see LIV passim) and it has become clear
that the acrostatic ablaut of the formation is not in fact anomalous (Strunk 1985).
Greek examples can be sorted as follows in terms of how likely to be inherited they
are.
We are now able to cite four Greek sigmatic aorists with stem-cognates in two
other branches of the family:
PIE ∗dḗyḱs- ~ ∗déyḱs-³⁷ ‘point at’ (Gāthā-Av. injunctive 2sg. dāiš ‘show’, Lat. pf.
dīxisse ‘to have said’) >→ δεῖξαι ‘to show’;
³⁴ Though sigmatic πεῖσαι has begun to compete with it.
³⁵ Bendahman (1993: 76) also notes this distinction.
³⁶ For alternatives, all of which strike me as less likely, see Bendahman (1993: 76–7).
³⁷ I question the judgment of LIV s.v. ∗deik̯ ̑ that these are parallel innovations; in my opinion Skt
ádiṣṭa is more likely to be an innovative s-aorist form (cf. 1sg. ádikṣi), and Skt pres. di´sá-, Lat. dīcere ‘to


===== PDF PAGE 222 =====
212 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗wḗǵʰs- ~ ∗wéǵʰs- ‘bring in a vehicle’ (Skt 3sg. ávāṭ, Lat. vēxisse) >→
Cyprian 3sg. e-we-xe ∗ἔϝεξε ‘(s)he brought/dedicated’ (Masson 245.2);
PIE ∗h₃rḗǵs- ~ ∗h₃réǵs- ‘put in a straight line’ (Lat. pf. rēxisse, Toch. B 3sg. reksa
‘(s)he covered’) >→ ὀρέξαι ‘to reach’;
PIE ∗plḗws- ~ ∗pléws- ‘float (from/to)’ (Skt mp. 3sg. aploṣṭa ‘it floated off ’, Toch.
B 3sg. plyewsa ‘it hovered’) >→ πλε˜υσαι ‘to sail’.³⁸
It is striking that the presents of all four of these verbs were unaffixed in PIE (a
root-present in the first instance, simple thematic presents in the others); if the
hypothesis that only one stem of a verb could be unaffixed in PIE is even approx-
imately correct, an s-aorist is what we would expect for all four. Note that Greek
has generalized the (short) e-grade; that is an exceptionless development in the
sigmatic aorist (Schwyzer 1939: 751).³⁹
Two other Greek sigmatic aorists have possible external stem-cognates in Ana-
tolian, the outlying branch of the family, and are therefore also good candidates
for inheritance:
PIE ∗kḗrs- ~ ∗kérs- ‘cut (off )’ (Hitt. pres. 3sg. karszi) >→ Hom. κέρσαι;
PIE ∗h₂ḗrh₃s- ~ ∗h₂árh₃s- ‘break ground’ (Hitt. pres. 3sg. harszi) >→ ἀρ´οσαι ‘to
plow’.
A larger number of possible stem-cognates are found in Latin:
PIE ∗klḗps- ~ ∗kléps- ‘steal’ (Old Lat. 3sg. clepsit) >→ κλέψαι;
PIE ∗spḗḱs- ~ ∗spéḱs- ‘look’ (Old Lat. pf. 3sg. spexit) >→ σκέψασθαι;
PIE ∗tḗngs- ~ ∗téngs- ‘moisten, get (something) wet’ (Lat. pf. tīnxisse) >→
τέγξαι;
PIE ∗pḗkʷs- ~ ∗pékʷs- ‘cook’ (Lat. pf. coxisse) >→ πέψαι;
PIE ∗ḗws- ~ ∗éws- (underlyingly /ews-s-/) ‘to burn’ (Lat. pf. ussisse) >→ εὗσαι
‘to singe’;
PIE ∗h₂ḗws- ~ ∗h₂áws- (underlyingly /-s-s-/) ‘to fetch’ (Lat. pf. hausisse ‘to have
drawn (water)’) >→ ἐν-α˜υσαι ‘to kindle, to light (a fire)’;
PIE ∗h₂ḗnǵʰs- ~ ∗h₂ánǵʰs- ‘to squeeze, to choke’ (Lat. pf. ānxisse, acc. to
Priscian) >→ ἄγξαι;
PIE ∗lḗyǵʰs- ~ ∗léyǵʰs- ‘lick (once)’ (Lat. pf. līnxisse (Priscian) with -n-leveled
in from pres. lingere) >→ λεῖξαι;
PIE ∗kʷā́ ts- ~ ∗kʷáts- ‘shake’ (see 3.6.3 with fn. 49; Lat. pf. quassisse) >→ πάσαι
‘to sprinkle’.
say’, Goth. gateihan ‘to announce, to report’ all reflect direct thematization of an ablauting root-present
∗déyḱ- ~ ∗diḱ-, which should belong to the same paradigm as an s-aorist.
³⁸ With -σ- reintroduced in place of ∗-h- at some point before the loss of intervocalic ∗ϝ in the
thematic present.
³⁹ A fifth example, potentially reconstructable from Hom. mp. ἕσ(σ)ασθαι ‘put on a garment’, Arm.
3sg. zgecʰaw, and Toch. B 3sg. wa¨ssāte, is uncertain: in Greek and Armenian it is the aorist of the
(originally causative) present in ∗-néw- ~ ∗-nu- and as such is likely to be an innovation (LIV s.v. 1.
∗ u̯ es, fn. 6).


===== PDF PAGE 223 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 213
Of course any individual pair of stems could reflect parallel development, since the
sigmatic aorist has been highly productive in Greek and can have been so in the
prehistory of Latin. But modern cladistic studies of the family show that Greek and
Italic are not closely related, and that increases the probability that at least some
of these apparent stem-cognations are real. Note also the implication of present
tenses such as εὕɛ¯ν < ∗éws-e/o-, with roots ending in ∗ws. Such presents should
have undergone the 1CL; their attested shapes can only have been remodeled on
their s-aorists. But it follows that s-aorists to at least a few such verbs were in exis-
tence before the 1CL occurred; and it also follows that they either had not acquired
the stem vowel -α/ε-, so that their ∗ws were not intervocalic in most forms, or else
that they had restored the suffixal ∗-s- (∗éws-s-V-, etc.). By contrast, s-aorists cer-
tainly attested only in Greek and Indo-Iranian are few, and only one is represented
in the Rigveda:
PIE ∗wḗyh₁s- ~ ∗wéyh₁s- ‘hurry’ (Skt subj. 3sg. véṣat RV I.180.6) >→ Hom. 3sg.
εἵσατο ‘he rushed, it sped’.
(See further LIV s.vv. 2. ∗hu̯ es, ∗ sreu̯ , ∗tres.)
That Vedic Sanskrit is attested so early, yet shares few s-aorists with other daugh-
ters, is one factor that led earlier scholars to conclude that most s-aorists were
post-PIE developments; but given that Greek and Indo-Iranian are obviously
closely related, and that Greek shares more s-aorists with more distant relatives,
we should consider the possibility that the s-aorist underwent a sharp decline in
the prehistory of Indo-Iranian, followed by a resurgence.
Sigmatic aorists made to vowel-final roots normally exhibit -σ-, which must have
been leveled in from the aorists of consonant-final roots at some time after the PGk
sound change ∗s > ∗h (see 3.5.1). Two aorists which did not restore -σ- must be of
PGk date, even though neither has clear stem-cognates elsewhere (LIV s.vv. ∗ g̑ ʰeu̯ ,
∗keh₂u̯ ):
pre-Gk ∗ǵʰew-s- ‘pour’ > ∗χεϝ-h- > ∗χɛ¯ϝ- (by the 1CL, see 5.2.2) > χε- (by loss
of intervocalic ∗ϝ and prevocalic shortening, see 6.2) > Hom. 3sg. χέε, etc.;
pre-Gk ∗kaw-s- ‘set on fire, burn’ > ∗καϝ-h- > ∗κᾱϝ- > Att.-Ion. κη- > Hom. 3sg.
ἔκηε, etc.
However, most Greek sigmatic aorists do appear to be innovations. Those made to
denominative presents are necessarily Greek innovations, since derived presents
had no aorists in Nuclear IE (so far as we can tell). Evidently such an aorist
as φυλάξαι ‘to guard’ was constructed to pres. φυλάσσɛ¯ν on the model of such
underived examples as aor. κλέψαι ‘to steal’, pres. κλέπτɛ¯ν—and that could have
happened at any time.
Part of the development of the s-aorist can perhaps be reconstructed by examin-
ing the aorists of denominative verbs derived from stems in vowels. The creation of
aorists to such stems seems to have occurred in at least two stages. A tiny handful


===== PDF PAGE 224 =====
214 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
of derived presents in ∗-εjε/ο- delete the entire present suffix before adding the
sigmatic suffix:
δ´οξαι ‘to win approval, to be resolved (by a legislature)’ ← δοκɛ˜ν ‘to seem good’;
ὦσαι ‘to shove’ ← ὠθɛ˜ν ‘to push (continuously or repeatedly)’;
Hom. φῑ́λασθαι ‘conceive affection for, show kindness to’ Il. four times ← φιλɛ˜ν
‘to be friendly to, to love’ (see 5.2.2 on the phonology).
The fact that one of these archaic stems was constructed to a transparent denom-
inative shows that this cannot be an innovation resulting from the opacity of the
presents’ derivation; it must be the way in which sigmatic aorists were originally
constructed to presents in ∗-εjε/ο-. The later procedure, still completely productive
in Greek, is to retain the vowel before the ∗j (which may or may not have been lost
intervocalically by then); and just as ∗-ᾱ(j)ε/ο- became -α˘(j)ε/ο- by analogy with
-ε(j)ε/ο- and -ο(j)ε/ο-, so ∗-εσα- was lengthened to -ησα- and ∗-οσα- to -ωσα- on
the model of -ᾱσα-, at least in the well-attested dialects of Ancient Greek. Already
in Homer we find the innovative φιλῆσαι a dozen times, of which a substantial
majority are in the Iliad.
The lengthening seems to be characteristic only of denominative verbs; sig-
matic aorists to primary verbs, such as γελάσαι ‘to burst out laughing’ and καλέσαι
‘to call’, have mostly been unaffected. Aorists to presents in ∗-εh-jε/ο-, such as
τελέσσαι ‘to finish’, South Greek τελέσαι (Hom. pres. τελείɛ¯ν) also often remain
unaffected. Whether there is any connection between those two phenomena is not
immediately obvious.
Is there evidence that bears on the date of any of these developments? We know
that the sigmatic aorist suffix participated in the change of ∗s to ∗h between sono-
rants, and that the outcome ∗h is normal even in a class of aorists that must be
Greek innovations:
τέκτων ‘carpenter, joiner’ → ∗τεκταν-jε/ο- > τεκταίνεσθαι ‘to make (of wood)’,
to which was created aor. ∗τεκταν-hα- > Hom. 3sg. τεκτήνατο Il. 5.62.
Of course it doesn’t follow that particular sigmatic aorists were created to presents
of this type before the change of ∗s to ∗h, because there must have been a period
when the alternation between ∗s and ∗h was completely automatic and would thus
affect all new formations. But analogical -s-has already replaced intervocalic ∗-h-
in sigmatic aorists attested in Mycenaean; clear examples are e-ra-se ∗ἔλασε and
e-re-u-te-ro-se ∗ἐλευθέρωσε (Aura Jorro 1999 s.vv., Bartoněk 2002: 326), and there
are no clear counterexamples. It is reasonable to conclude, with caution, that the
sigmatic aorist began to spread very early in the history of Greek, perhaps in the
Proto-Greek period.
The inflection of the sigmatic aorist, especially the spread of ‘alphathematic’ -α-,
will be discussed in 5.4.2 (i).


===== PDF PAGE 225 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 215
4.2.2 (iv) Aorists in -ή-
For the most part these are clearly passive in Classical Greek, but in Homer the sit-
uation is more complicated. Many are simply intransitive (e.g. δαήμεναι ‘to learn’),
and a few that cannot be called passive survive in later Greek (e.g. ῥυῆναι ‘to (begin
to) flow’, cf. 3sg. ῥύη Od. 3.455; χαρῆναι ‘to rejoice’); some function as passives in
Homer because of the telic nature of their roots (e.g. ἔβλαβεν Il. 23.461, βλάβεν
545 ‘they got hurt’). Evidently this was originally an intransitive formation, and (as
has long been recognized) its only possible source is the class of PIE derived sta-
tives/fientives in ∗-éh₁-. That these are aorists in Greek supports the arguments of
Harðarson (1998) that the PIE formation was fientive (and therefore perfective);
the fact that the cognate formations in Hittite, Tocharian, and Latin are presents
can reflect innovations in those branches.
None of the possible stem-cognations in other branches of the family strikes me
as certain, but three seem to be plausible:
PIE ∗tr̥ séh₁- ‘be dry’ (Lat. ptc. torrēns ‘parched, hot’) >→ Hom. τερσήμεναι ‘to
dry out’ Od. 6.98, τερσῆναι ‘to be staunched’ Il. 16.519 (with e-grade and
-ρσ- leveled in from the present);
PIE ∗mnéh₁- ~ ∗ mn̥ éh₁- ‘be mentally active’ vel sim. (Lith. minė́ ti ‘to men-
tion, to commemorate’, OCS mĭněti ‘to believe’) >→ Att., Hdt. μανῆναι ‘to
go crazy’;
PIE ∗tupéh₁- ‘be stricken’ (?; Lat. stupēre ‘to be stunned’) >→ Hom. ἐτύπη ‘he
had been struck (with)’ Il. 24.421, ptc. τυπείς ‘struck’.
However, two further examples, though they have no external stem-cognates, were
certainly already in existence in Proto-Greek:
(post-)PIE ∗gʷih₃óh₁- /∗gʷih₃-éh₁-/ ‘be/become alive’ > Hom. βιῶναι ‘to
escape alive’;
(post-)PIE ∗wl̥h₃óh₁- /∗wl̥h₃-éh₁-/ ‘be stricken’ (?; cf. Hitt. 3sg. walhzi ‘(s)he
strikes’, LIV s.v. ∗ u̯ elh₃-) > Hom. ἁλ ωμεναι´ ~ ἁλῶναι ‘to be taken captive’.
These cannot be root-aorists; they can only be aorists in ∗-éh₁- (Francis 1971: 65–
87, Harðarson 1993: 208–10, LIV s.v. ∗ gu̯ieh₃ fn. 11). Whether or not they were
inherited from PIE, they must have been in existence while the third laryngeal
still existed to round the following ∗e, and that was well before the Proto-Greek
period.
The competing (and productive) formation in -θή- is certainly a Greek inno-
vation, as is revealed by the fact that the suffix is often added to full-grade roots
even when a zero grade would be unproblematic, e.g. μειχθῆναι vs. μιγῆναι ‘to get
mixed’, etc. (Risch 1974: 250–4). The only possible source for this suffix is reseg-
mentation, the aorist in -ή- to a root extended with -θ- having been reanalyzed


===== PDF PAGE 226 =====
216 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
as an aorist in -θή- to the corresponding unextended root (Chantraine 1925:
105–6, Risch 1974: 253–4). What the original pair of roots was is of course no
longer recoverable—they need not both have survived to be attested. Whether the
reanalysis had occurred already in Proto-Greek is also undiscoverable, though the
ubiquity of -θή- in Greek dialects suggests that it could have.
4.2.3 Perfect stems
The Nuclear IE perfect underwent a great deal of development and elaboration in
the prehistory and history of Ancient Greek. In addition to the active perfect, also
attested (directly or indirectly) in Tocharian, Italic, Celtic, Germanic, and Indo-
Iranian, Greek has developed a mediopassive perfect which seems to have little to
do with the similar Indo-Iranian formation (and nothing at all to do with Old Irish
deponent preterites). I will treat them in that order.
4.2.3 (i) Active perfects
I have argued elsewhere (Ringe 2022) that the Nuclear IE perfect was a purely
stative formation, any ‘resultative’ nuances being attributable to the lexical mean-
ings of roots from which it was formed (see also Cowgill 1974a: 563 and Ku¨mmel
2020). Several ancient IE languages exhibit relics pointing in that direction, but
the most important evidence is that of Homeric Greek.
Nearly all active perfects in Homer are clearly stative or can easily be inter-
preted as such (Wackernagel 1904, Chantraine 1927: 8–16). However, only a
minority can be shown to be inherited. It is necessary to consider examples
made from consonant-final roots and those made from vowel-final (originally,
laryngeal-final) roots separately because of the formal divergences between them
that occurred within the prehistory of Greek. The lone unreduplicated perfect that
can be reconstructed for Nuclear IE survives in Greek, with its ablaut alternations
largely intact in Homer:
NIE 1sg. ∗wóydh₂a ‘I know’ (Skt véda, Goth. wait, OCS vědě) > οἶδα;
NIE 2sg. ∗wóydsth₂a ‘you (sg.) know’ (Skt véthʰa) > οἶσθα (see 3.2.1 on the
aspirate);
NIE 3sg. ∗wóyde ‘(s)he knows’ (Skt véda, Goth. wait) > οἶδε;
NIE 1pl. ∗widmé ‘we know’ (Skt vidmá) >→ ἴδμεν;
NIE subj. 3sg. ∗wéydeti ‘(s)he will know’ (Skt védati) >→ ∗εἴδει, transmitted as
εἰδῇ (see below);
NIE iptv. 2sg. ∗widsdʰ´ı  ‘know!’ (Sktviddʰ´ı) > ἴσθι;
NIE ptc. masc. nom. sg. ∗wéydwˉos ‘knowing’ (Skt vidvan̄́ , remodeled) >→ εἰδ ως;´
NIE ptc. fem. nom. sg. ∗widwésih₂ ‘knowing’ → ∗widúsih₂ (Skt vidúṣī) > ἰδυῖα.


===== PDF PAGE 227 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 217
This much of the paradigm, at least, must have been present in Proto-Greek.
Note that the reconstruction ∗εἴδει is not doubtful. The Homeric paradigm of this
subjunctive makes no sense as transmitted:
εἰδῶ εἴδομεν
εἰδῇς εἴδετε
εἰδῇ εἰδῶσι
Since the 1pl. and 2pl. consistently have a short subjunctive vowel, we expect the
other forms to have been εἴδω, εἴδεις, εἴδει, εἴδουσι. The forms actually transmit-
ted, which are identical with the Classical Attic forms, can have been substituted
for them in the transmission of the text without disrupting the meter; in the case of
the 1pl. and 2pl. that was not possible, which is why the older, genuinely Homeric
forms survive.
Two other inherited consonant-final perfects that still exhibit traces of their
original ablaut in Homer are:
NIE 3sg. ∗memóne ‘(s)he has in mind’ (Lat. meminit, Goth. ga-man ‘(s)he
remembers’; cf. Goth. 1sg. man ‘I think so’) > μέμονε ‘(s)he intends, (s)he is
eager’; 1pl. ∗ memn̥ mé >→ μέμαμεν, ptc. ∗ memnwṓs ̥ >→ μεμα ως;´
(post-)NIE 3sg. ∗ǵeǵónh₁e ‘(s)he is born’ > γέγονε (but Skt transitive jajā́ na
either has undergone a shift in function or is an innovation); ptc. fem.
∗ǵeǵn̥ h₁wésih₂ >→ ἐκγεγαυῖα ‘born of ’ Il. 3.418.
The latter stem lost its laryngeal by reanalysis early in the prehistory of Greek
(so that the Homeric participle exhibits -α- < ∗-n̥  -, not ∗-n̥  h₁-); that could have
been a PGk development, though it did not affect derived nominals like γένεσις
and (κασί)γνητος. In both paradigms the zero-grade stems μεμα-, γεγα- have
been generalized to forms with vowel-initial endings, e.g. 3pl. μεμάᾱσι, γεγάᾱσι;
that is likely to have occurred not long before the composition of the Homeric
poems, since such forms consistently remain uncontracted (in contrast to consis-
tent ἑστᾶσι, in which the stem ἑστα- ended in a vowel reflecting a PIE laryngeal).
Though it is not clear that Skt jajā́ na is a genuine cognate of γέγονε, both the ablaut
and the intransitive meaning of the latter argue that it existed in Proto-Greek and
was probably inherited from NIE. The same can be said of five other stems that
have no clear stem-cognates but do exhibit traces of NIE ablaut:
(post-)NIE 1sg. ∗dedwóyh₂a ‘I’m afraid’ > PGk ∗δέδϝοjα > ∗δέδϝοα > Hom.
δείδω (i.e. δɛ̄́ δω, by the 3CL; see 7.2.2); 1pl. ∗dedwimé >→ δείδιμεν;
(post-)NIE ∗wewóyke ‘(s)he resembles’ > Hom. ἔοικε ‘(s)he resembles; it is
fitting’; 2du. ἔϊκτον Od. 4.27, plup. 3du. ἐΐκτην four times;
(post-)NIE ∗bʰebʰóydʰe ‘(s)he trusts’ > Hom. πέποιθε; plup. 1pl. ἐπέπιθμεν Il.
thrice;


===== PDF PAGE 228 =====
218 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
(post-)NIE ∗h₁eh₁lówdʰ- ~ ∗h₁eh₁ludʰ- ‘be here, have arrived’ >→ Hom. 1sg.
εἰλήλουθα and ἀπ-, ἐπ-ελήλυθα (Od. three times);
post-NIE 1sg. ∗kʷekʷóndʰh₂a ‘I am one who has suffered’ (see LIV s.v. ∗ku̯endʰ)
> Hom. πέπονθα Od. 17.284; 2pl. ∗kʷekʷn̥ dʰsté > πέπασθε Od. three times
(see 3.4.4 on the phonology), cf. also fem. ptc. dat. sg. πεπαθυίῃ Od. 17.555.
While we cannot be completely certain that any one of these stems was present
in Proto-Greek, and while the distribution of ablaut grades has been disrupted
in every one of them except the last (which is attested only half a dozen times),
collectively they show that the alternation between o-grade and zero-grade forms
that was inherited from NIE continued to exist in PGk perfects made to roots with
internal ε. In many other examples the o-grade has been generalized; only those
with potential outside cognates seem worth mentioning:
NIE ∗h₁geh₁góre ‘(s)he is awake’ (Skt jāgā́ ra) ~ ∗h₁geh₁gr̥ - (e.g. in Skt ptc.
jāgr̥ van̄́ ) > PGk ∗ἐγήγορε ~ ∗ἐγηγρ̥- >→ ἐγρήγορε, ptc. ἐγρηγορ ως,´ etc.
(influenced by aor. ἐγρέσθαι ‘to wake up (intr.)’);
(post-)NIE ∗dedórḱe ‘(s)he looks’ (Skt dadár´sa is resultative ‘(s)he has seen’ but
can have undergone a semantic shift; see Ku¨mmel 2000: 231–3) ~ ∗dedr̥ ḱ-
>→ Hom. δέδορκεν ‘he glares’ Il. 22.95, ptc. δεδορκ ως´ Od. 19.446;
(post-)NIE ∗wewórǵe ‘(s)he is a worker’ (?; cf. Av. vauuarəza ‘(s)he has done’?)
~ ∗ wewr̥ ǵ- >→ Hom. ἐσθλὰ ἔοργε ‘he has done good deeds’ Il. 2.272, ptc.
ὅ τε πολλὰ ἐοργ ως´ ‘and the one who has done much’ Il. 11.320 (both
emphasizing the state of the subject, Wackernagel 1904: 4).
The first of these three examples is important because it is the most plausible
model for ‘Attic’ reduplication (cf. Rix 1976a: 73, 204) on the hypothesis that clus-
ters of laryngeal plus stop, being obstruent clusters, were reduplicated in their
entirety (Warren Cowgill, p.c. ca. 1978; LIV s.v. ∗h₁ger). Perfect reduplication
VCV¯C-to roots beginning VC-must have spread from this example (and per-
haps one or two others that did not survive) after the vocalization of laryngeals
but before ‘be awake’ was remodeled. Whether this was already happening in
Proto-Greek is unclear; the only possible evidence is the dialect distribution of
Attic reduplication.⁴⁰ In the Attic-Ionic dialects it is well attested. There seem to
be no Arkadian examples, but Cyprian attests o-mo-mo-ko-ne ∗ὀμ ωμοκον´ ‘they
had sworn’ Masson 8.6 and i-na-la-li-si-me-na ‘inscribed’ Masson 217.26, which
shows that the formation was common to South Greek. The few forms in Alka-
ios’ verse are identical with Homeric forms (Hamm 1958: 161) and could simply
be epicisms; of the Lesbian epigraphical examples, 4th-century κατεληλύθοντος
DGE 620.9 is probably genuine, but the few other examples are late and can
reflect Attic koine influence (cf. Hodot 1990: 207–8). West Greek forms that are
early enough that koine influence can (probably) be discounted include Heraklean
⁴⁰ I omit doubtful examples from this discussion.


===== PDF PAGE 229 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 219
ἀπολ ωλη´ ‘had been lost’ DGE 62.39, Cretan inf. ἀμπεληλε˜υθεν Inscriptiones cret-
icae IV.42.B.4, and Kyrenaian κατεληλευθυῖα Buck 115.102. Such a distribution
suggests that Attic reduplication might have been a Proto-Greek innovation. How-
ever, 3rd-century Boiotian διεσσείλθεικε DGE 485.2, ἀπειλθείοντες IG VII.1748.3,
1749.2 argue caution, considering that the inflection of the perfect is relatively
conservative in Boiotian (see below).
As is well known, active perfects made to verbs with internal PGk ∗ᾱ do not
exhibit o-grade roots; their ablaut is ᾱ ~ α (Att.-Ion. η ~ α), to the extent that they
exhibit ablaut at all. Typical examples are:
τέθᾱλεν ‘it blooms’ Sappho 2.9, ‘he prospers’ Bakkhylides 10.40, ptc. φύλλοισι
τεθηλ ως´ ‘leafed out’ Od. 12.103, fem. τεθαλυῖα Homer six times;
λέλᾱκα ‘I screech’ Alkman 1.86, ptc. λεληκως ´ ‘shrieking’ Il. 22.141, fem.
λελακυῖα Od. 12.85;
πεπᾱ́ γαισιν ‘they are frozen’ Alkaios 338.2, παρὰ δ’ ἔγχεα μακρὰ πέπηγεν ‘and
(their) long spears are stuck (in the ground) beside (them)’ Il. 3.135.
A fuller list of examples is given at Kimball (1988: 242–3). As Kimball also
observes, there is indirect evidence that this was not the PGk situation. Hesykhios
records a mediopassive perfect τέθωκται. τεθʋ̄́ μωται ‘is enraged’, τεθωγμένοι.
μεμεθυσμένοι ‘drunk’ and an aorist θῶξαι. μεθύσαι ‘to intoxicate’, clearly related
to θήγɛ¯ν Hom. ‘to sharpen’, later ‘to provoke’, aor. ptc. θᾱ́ ξαις ‘whetting’ Pin-
dar Olympian X.20; the o-grade of these forms makes no sense unless they were
formed to a lost active perfect ∗τέθωγε ‘it is sharp’. The prehistories of the two per-
fects of this type that might conceivably have outside cognates must therefore be
reconstructed as follows:
(post-)NIE ∗pepóh₂ǵ- ~ ∗peph₂ǵ- ‘be fixed’ (cf. Lat. trans. pf. pepigisse with
resultative meaning?) > PGk ∗πεπωγ- ~ ∗πεπαγ- → πεπᾱγ- > πεπηγ-;
(post-)NIE ∗wewóh₂g- ~ ∗wewh₂g- ‘be broken’ (cf. Toch. B pret. ptc. wawākau
‘split’?) > PGk ∗ϝεϝωγ- ~ ∗ϝεϝαγ- → ∗ϝεϝᾱγ- > Att. ἐᾱγέναι.
Roots with PGk internal η normally preserve the o-grade, though none has stem-
cognates elsewhere:
PIE ∗wreh₁ǵ- ‘break’ (see LIV s.v. ∗ u̯ reh₁g̑ -), pf. ∗wewróh₁ǵe ‘it is broken’
remodeled in Att. ἔρρωγε;
(post-)NIE ∗sweh₁-dʰ- ‘become accustomed’ (cf. Lat. pres. suēscere), pf.
∗seswóh₁dʰe ‘(s)he is accustomed’ > Hom. ɛ̓̄́ ωθε.
That must have been the Proto-Greek situation as well.
Vowel-final active perfects have acquired an extension -κ- in the indicative sin-
gular and the subjunctive (i.e. in all forms which usually have a full-grade root).
At least two directly reflect NIE perfects, namely ∗bʰe-bʰúH- ‘be (by nature or


===== PDF PAGE 230 =====
220 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
growth)’ (cf. Skt 3sg. babʰū́ va⁴¹ ‘it is (by nature)’ RV VII.103.7; cf. Ku¨mmel 2000:
344) and ∗ste-stóh₂- ~ ∗ste-sth₂- ‘be in a standing position’ (cf. Skt 3sg. tastʰau ‘she
stands erect’ RV III.55.14). The Greek innovations in the inflection of these stems
can be illustrated by their Homeric paradigms:
indic. 3pl. πεφύᾱσι(ν) four times (πεφʋ̄́ κασι Od. 7.114), subj. 3sg. πεφʋ̄́ κηι Il.
4.483, ptc. πεφυυῖα, etc. four times, plup. 3sg. πεφʋ̄́ κει five times;
indic. 2sg. ἕστηκας Il. 5.485, 3sg. ἕστηκε(ν) ten times, 2du. ἕστατον Il. 23.284,
1pl. διέσταμεν Il. 21.436, 2pl. ἀφέστατε Il. 4.340, 3pl. ἑστᾶσι(ν) nine times
(ἑστήκᾱσιν Il. 4.434), subj. 3sg. ἑστήκηι twice, opt. 3sg. ἀφεσταίη twice Od.,
iptv. 2sg. ἕσταθ’ Od. 22.489, 2du. ἕστατον Il. 23.443, 2pl. ἕστατε Il. 20.354,
inf. ἑστάμεν(αι) seventeen times, ptc. ἑστα´οτος, etc. thirty-eight times, plup.
3sg. ἑστήκει(ν) twenty-one times, 1pl. ἕσταμεν Od. 11.466, 3pl. ἕστασαν
thirty-two times.
The former stem was anomalous in NIE in that it did not ablaut because the root
did not ablaut; in the latter the inherited full-grade ∗oh₂ > ∗ω was replaced by
∗ᾱ > η, as expected (see above), and in this case there is no indication that that
could not have occurred at the PGk stage. But in both stems, and in all other Greek
perfect stems ending in vowels, -κ- was inserted between the stem and the endings
in the singular of the indicative (both perfect and pluperfect) and in the subjunc-
tive. The Boiotian dialect, which preserves a range of archaisms, also normally
exhibits -κ- in the indicative singular of vowel-final perfect stems but not in other
forms (Ringe 1984: 175–86; see also 7.3.3 below); unfortunately the only Boiotian
perfect subjunctive is periphrastic δεδωῶσα ἴη (DGE 462.A.30).
As Kimball (1991: 148) points out, sg. -κα, -κας, -κε of aor. ἔθηκα, etc., could
have been parsed by native learners as endings appropriate for vowel-final stems;
in that case their spread to the perfect would have been a natural development (pp.
151–2), especially since 1sg. -α, 3sg. -ε were normal perfect endings. But a later
generation of native learners apparently re-parsed the perfect forms as πέφῡκ-ε,
etc., reinterpreting -κ- as part of the full-grade alternant of the stem; the result
was that it spread to the only other full-grade forms in the paradigm, namely the
subjunctive.
How much of this development had already occurred in PGk? Even the intro-
duction of the endings -κα, -κας, -κε could have occurred at that stage only if the
active indicative singular of ἔθηκα were already in place, and as we have seen,
a relic of a κ-less paradigm appears to be actually attested (4.2.2 (i)). Under the
circumstances we cannot be certain what the PGk situation was. In any case
⁴¹ Note that this perfect is revealed to be an archaism by a double anomaly: a regular perfect to this
root could only be ‘bubʰa ̄́va’, with different vowels both in the root and in the reduplicating syllable.


===== PDF PAGE 231 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 221
the spread of -κ- in these perfect paradigms was an ongoing process (except in
Boiotian); for instance, in Homer it has begun to spread into the 3pl. (note the
two examples above), there are occasional examples of participles with -κ-, and
δείδω ‘I’m afraid’ (see the beginning of this section) has largely been replaced by
δείδοικα. These are clearly later phenomena and will be addressed in 7.3.3.
The ablaut pattern of perfects built to roots of the shape ∗CeRH- has under-
gone substantial evolution in Greek. For instance, the NIE perfect of ∗telh₂- ‘lift’
can only have been ∗tetólh₂- ~ ∗tetl̥h₂-, surviving in Old Lat. tetulit (LIV s.v. ∗telh₂).
In Greek we would expect to find ∗τετολ(α)- ~ ∗τετλᾱ- > τετλη-. The former type
is never found (except for ∗ǵeǵónh₁e > γέγονε, on which see above). The latter
appears consistently in Homeric participles: τετλη´οτι nine times, τετλη´οτες Il.
5.873, τετληυῖα Od. 20.23. Otherwise it has been replaced by a ‘hyper-zero-grade’
τετλα-, apparently formed to τετλη- as if the latter were full-grade. It seems pos-
sible that indicative sg. τετληκ- was constructed to τετλη- in the manner outlined
above, and then τετλα- was constructed to τετληκ- on the model of ‘stand’, but
I can think of no way to demonstrate that. The facts regarding Hom. κέκμηκε ‘is
exhausted’ and τέθνηκε ‘is dead’ are precisely parallel. None of these developments
can be projected back into PGk with any confidence.
Since I do not think that the comparative evidence justifies the reconstruction
of a pluperfect for PIE, I believe that the Greek active pluperfect is an innovation;
its inflection must be innovative in any case, since no related language exhibits
any similar paradigm. We are very poorly informed about the inflection of the
pluperfect outside of Attic-Ionic, since most of the epigraphical examples can (and
in many cases clearly do) reflect Attic influence. Three examples are early enough
to be taken seriously:
Heraklean ἀπολ ωλη´ ‘had been lost’ DGE 62.39;
Delphian ἐφεστᾱ́ κεον ‘they were in charge’ Fouilles de Delphes V.20.39 (DGE
326, notes);
Cyprian o-mo-mo-ko-ne ∗ὀμ ωμοκον´ ‘they had sworn’ Masson 8.6.
(Cyprian a-no-ko-ne ∗ἄνωγον ‘they ordered’ Masson 217.2 is also etymologically a
pluperfect but might have been reinterpreted as an imperfect, as in Homer, so that
its ending has more than one potential source.) The first two examples demon-
strate that in at least some West Greek dialects the 3sg. originally ended in ∗-εε,
as in Attic-Ionic: Heraklean -η is the sound-change outcome of that ending (see
7.2.3), while Delphian 3pl. -εον was obviously constructed to it. But Cyprian -ον
strongly suggests that the PGk pluperfect 3sg. ending was just ∗-ε, identical with the
perfect 3sg. ending. All hypotheses regarding the inflection of the active pluperfect
are necessarily speculative, but Berg (1977) still seems the most plausible to me.
For very different scenarios, see Jasanoff and Katz (2017) with references.


===== PDF PAGE 232 =====
222 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
4.2.3 (ii) Mediopassive perfects
A large number of mediopassive perfects are attested already in Homer; many are
passives, some with a resultative meaning. This is not surprising, considering that
such stems are already well attested in Mycenaean, especially passive participles,
some constructed to basic verbs (de-de-me-no ‘bound’, ke-ka-u-me-no ‘burnt’, etc.)
but others obviously denominative (a-ra-ro-mo-te-me-no ‘assembled’, qe-qi-no-
me-no ‘turned on a lathe’ (?) with 3sg. qe-qi-no-to, etc.; see Bartoněk 2002: 328,
332). However, not all mediopassive perfects can be equally old.
It is clear that mediopassive perfects with e-grade roots (λέλειπται ‘is left,
remains’, etc.) cannot be inherited, since according to the inherited ablaut system
for perfects a mediopassive perfect ought to have a zero-grade root (Chantraine
1973: 432, Risch 1974: 342, etc.). Mediopassive perfects of derived verbs also can-
not be inherited, since there is no good evidence that derived verbs constructed
perfects at all in NIE. Whether either of these types could have developed already
in PGk is difficult to say.
But most mediopassive perfects with zero-grade roots do not seem to have been
inherited either. There is only one with a highly plausible stem-cognate in another
IE language (LIV s.v. ∗k̑ lei̯ ):
?Central IE mp. ∗ḱe-ḱli- ‘lean, rest’ (cf. Skt ´si´sriye ‘(Agni) is set (in the wood)’ RV
X.91.2, opt. ´si´srīta ‘would remain fixed’ RV I.149.2) > κεκλι- in ἐγκέκλιται
‘(the burden) rests’ Il. 6.78, ἐκέκλιτο ‘(the spear) was right up against (a
cloud)’ Il. 5.356, etc.
Since Greek and Indo-Iranian clearly started out in the same area of the Central IE
dialect continuum, it is possible that this example is a common inheritance. Also
worth considering as a possible cognate pair is:
?Central IE mp. ∗ste-str̥ h₃- ‘be scattered, be strewn’ (Skt tistiré ‘(the barhiṣ) is
strewn’ RV III.41.2) >→ ἔστρωτο ‘(an oxhide) was spread out’ Il. 10.155.
Other potential examples, however, are more problematic. Though Skt cucyuvé
(RV VIII.45.25) looks like a potential cognate of Hom. Gk ἔσσυται ‘(my θῡμ´ος)
is eager’ Od. 10.484, the equation is almost certainly a mirage: the (rare) Skt stem
is transitive, meaning something like ‘has set in motion’, while the Homeric stem is
an intransitive stative. Homeric κέχυται, etc. is consistently passive—‘it is poured’,
‘they are scattered’, etc.—while its apparent Skt cognate juhvé is middle in at least
two of its three occurrences (Grassmann 1996 s.v. hu, LIV s.v. g̑ ʰeu̯ ). Since the for-
mation is productive both in Greek and in Indo-Iranian, most apparently shared
examples can easily have been parallel innovations.
However, it is likely that PGk already possessed a nucleus of mediopassive per-
fect stems with zero-grade roots. Especially persuasive are examples like πέφαται
‘he lies slain’ and ɛ̔̄́ μαρται ‘it is fated’, whose shapes are opaque in Homeric Greek
but would have been much more transparent in PGk. On the other hand, the


===== PDF PAGE 233 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 223
coexistence of an active intransitive and a mediopassive perfect strongly sug-
gests that the latter is an innovation; Mycenaean te-tu-ko-wo-a₂, Hom. τετευχ ως´
Od. 12.423 vs. Hom. τετυγμένος, all meaning ‘fashioned, made’, are the obvious
example.
4.2.4 Future stems
It is now generally agreed that Greek future stems, like those of Indo-Iranian,
Balto-Slavic, and Celtic, are the reflexes of NIE desideratives. At least a hand-
ful of desideratives survive as present stems in the daughters; the most obvious
example is Lat. vīsere ‘to visit, to go to see, to behold’ < ∗wéyd-se/o- ‘want to see’,
and a present stem which Greek shares with Sanskrit must also originally have
been desiderative (LIV s.vv. ∗h₂elk, ∗h₂leks):
NIE ∗h₂lek- ‘ward off ’ (cf. Hom. aor. ἄλαλκε) → ∗h₂lék-se/o- ‘want to ward off ’
→ ‘ward off, defend’ (Skt 3sg. rákṣati) > Hom. ἀλεξέμεναι.
Two slightly different desiderative suffixes survive as Greek future suffixes, a
default ∗-se/o- and an extended ∗-h₁se/o-; the latter > ∗-εhε/ο- > ‘liquid future’
-εε/ο-, as in μενɛ˜ν ‘to be going to stay’ < ∗μενεhε/ο-. It seems likely that a genuine
future stem already existed in PGk, if only because there are no relic futures with
an overtly desiderative meaning. On the other hand, the curious fact that active
verbs often have middle futures could conceivably be an indirect reflex of their
originally desiderative function.
While both these future suffixes must have been present in PGk, it is difficult
to find unproblematic stem-cognates in related languages. That is not surprising,
given that the desiderative was a peripheral category of the NIE verb that was
widely lost in the daughters. A good many Greek futures resemble Indo-Iranian
or Old Irish subjunctives (LIV passim), but that can be an accident, since all the
relevant formations were marked by suffixes beginning with ∗-s- which need not
have been etymologically identical. At least one cognate pair seems solid (LIV s.v.
2.∗ deh₁):
NIE ∗déh₁-se/o- or ∗dáh₂-se/o- ‘want to meet’ (Skt 3sg. ábhi dāsati ‘(s)he is
hostile’) > fut. ∗δᾱhε/ο- or ∗δηhε/ο- > Hom. δήεις ‘you will find’.
The other proposed cognations that seem at least possible are the following:
?PIE ∗démh₂-s- ‘want to tame’ (Hitt. damass-‘press, oppress’?; but see Melchert
1994a: 70–1 on the phonological problems) >→ NIE ∗démh₂-se/o- >→ fut.
∗δαμαhε/ο-(remοdeled on pres. δαμνη/α- and aor. δαμασ(σ)α-, LIV s.v. 2.
∗demh₂) in 3sg. δαμᾶι ‘is going to overwhelm’ Il. 1.61;


===== PDF PAGE 234 =====
224 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
?NIE ∗démh₂-se/o- ‘want to build’ (Proto-Tocharian trans. pres. ∗ʦəm-ṣə/së-,
with the laryngeal reflex ∗-a- deleted, as typically in Tocharian derived
transitives, in Toch. B 2sg. tsamṣt ‘you cause to grow’, TA 3sg. tsma¨ṣ) >
∗δεμαhε/ο- →⁴² fut. ∗δεμεhε/ο- > Myc. ptc. masc. pl. de-me-o-te ∗δεμέhοντες
‘(men) going to build’, Att. δεμɛ˜ν;
?NIE ∗kél-se/o- ‘want to drive’ (?Toch. ‘bear, endure’: Toch. B pres. 3sg. ka¨lṣa¨ṃ,
3pl. ka¨lseṃ, Toch. A ptc. kla¨smāṃ; on the possible semantic development
see LIV s.v. ∗kel) > κέλσɛ¯ν ‘(that it) was going to land (i.e. was going to find
refuge)’ Aischylos Hiketides 331.
Perhaps a better guide to the PGk situation are the attested Greek futures that are
anomalous in one way or another. Two are isolated in suppletive paradigms:
PIE ∗h₃okʷ- ‘see’ (fossilized reduplicated desiderative ∗h₃´-hı ₃kʷ-se/o- in Skt
3sg. ı̄́kṣate ‘(s)he sees’, LIV s.v. ∗h₃ekʷ), desid. ∗h₃ókʷ-se/o- > fut. ὄψεσθαι;
pre-Gk ∗oys-se/o- ‘want to carry/bring’ (cf. οἰστ´ος ‘bearable’, Frisk s.v. οἴσω) >
fut. οἴσɛ¯ν.
A few (in addition to δήεις) have failed to reintroduce -σ- between vowels as
expected:
pre-Gk ∗pı´h₃-se/o- ‘want to drink’ > fut. πῑ́ εσθαι;⁴³
pre-Gk ∗ǵʰéw-se/o- ‘want to pour’ > ∗χεϝ-hε/ο- > ∗χɛ¯ϝε/ο- > χεε/ο- > Att. fut.
χɛ˜ν;
pre-Gk ∗élh₂-se/o- ‘want to drive’ > ἐλα-hε/ο- > Hom. ∗ἐλάɛ¯ν (transmitted as
ἐλάαν, Od. 5.290).
Finally, there are a few with an etymologically justified e-grade root which is not
well supported by the rest of their paradigms:
pre-Gk ∗gʰénd-se/o- ‘want to grasp’ > fut. χɛ̄́ σεσθαι (pres. χανδάνɛ¯ν, aor. χαδɛ˜ν,
Hom. plup. 3sg. κεχ´ονδει);
pre-Gk ∗kʷéndʰ-se/o- ‘want to experience’ > fut. πɛ̄́ σεσθαι (pres. πάσχɛ¯ν, aor.
παθɛ˜ν, Hom. pf. 1sg. πέπονθα);
pre-Gk ∗h₁léwdʰ-se/o- ‘want to arrive’ > fut. ἐλεύσεσθαι ‘to be going to come’
(Hom. aor. 3sg. ἤλυθε, pf. 1sg. εἰλήλουθα ~ ἀπελήλυθα).
⁴² Exactly how this replacement occurred remains unclear. It is possible that an anomalous future
was simply remodeled to conform to the majority type; but ∗demh₂- ‘build’, like ∗ǵenh₁- ‘be born’, has
lost its laryngeal completely in Greek verb forms except in the preconsonantal zero-grade stem (δμᾱ-
> δμη-, γνη-), and if that occurred very early the fut. ∗δεμεhε/ο- could have been formed within the
separate prehistory of Greek.
⁴³ This must be the model for unexpected fut. ἔδεσθαι ‘be going to eat’ (Warren Cowgill, p.c. ca.
1976).


===== PDF PAGE 235 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 225
4.2.5 Mood suffixes and the augment
Greek inherited from Core IE a subjunctive suffix that was ∗-e/o- for athematic
stems and ∗-ē/ˉo- (i.e. thematic ∗-e/o- plus subjunctive ∗-e/o-) for thematic stems.
Though the latter, as -η/ω-, has spread to all stems in literary Greek of the Classical
period, there are numerous indications in Homer that PGk athematic stems still
had short-voweled subjunctives in -ε/ο-:
Hom. εἴδομεν ‘(so that) we may know’, εἴδετε ‘(so that) ye may know’ (see 4.2.3
(i));
ἐρύσσομεν … ἀγείρομεν … θείομεν … βήσομεν ‘let’s launch (a ship) … let’s
assemble (a crew) … let’s put (a hecatomb in it) … let’s embark (Chryseis)’
Il. 1.141–4, all sigmatic aorist subjunctives (and see Chantraine 1973: 454–5,
458–9 for much longer lists of examples);
Hom. ἴομεν ‘let’s go’.
Sigmatic aorist subjunctives in -ε/ο- survived longest in the dialects of the Asia
Minor seaboard and the islands offshore, as well as in the southern Doric islands
(Buck 1955: 119–20), e.g.:
χαλάσσομεν δὲ τὰς θυμοβ´ορω λύας ‘and let’s let go of heart-consuming strife’,
Alkaios 70.10;
ἢν δὲ μὴ πρήξοισιν ‘if they do not exact the penalty’, DGE 688A.16–17, Ionic
(Chios), 5th century BC;
ὃς ἂν τὰ(ς) στήλας … ἢ κατάξει ἢ φοινικῆια ἐκκ´οψει ἢ ἀφανέας ποιήσει ‘who-
ever either breaks the stelae or chisels out the letters or makes them illegible’,
DGE 710B.35–9, Ionic (Teos), 5th century BC;
αἰ μέγ κα ὑποκύψει ‘if it submits’, DGE 251A.20, Koan, 4th century BC;
αἰ δέ κα δ´οξει ‘if it is agreed’, DGE 244.13, Astypalaian;
νικῆν δ’ ὄτερά κ’ οἰ πλίες ὀμ´οσοντι ‘whichever side the majority swears (in favor
of ) shall win (the suit)’, Buck 118.11–12, Cretan (Gortyn), 3rd century BC;
αἴ κα τῶι θεῶι τὰν τιμὰν ἐρεῖσες ‘if you have deposited the price for the god’,
Buck 115.8–9, Kyrenaian, early 4th century BC.
In this respect they preserved the PGk situation.
The optative had undergone somewhat less change by the classical period.
The inherited thematic optative suffix -οι- underwent no change at all. Athematic
∗-yéh₁- ~ ∗-ih₁- should have given ∗-η- ~ ∗-ι- after vowels; after consonants the
∗-y- of the full-grade alternant should have caused the sound changes character-
istic of y-clusters (see 3.6.3). What we actually find in athematic vowel stems is
-Vιη- ~ -Vι-, in which the -ι- of the full-grade alternant cannot reflect intervo-
calic ∗y. The most plausible explanation is that these athematic optatives have


===== PDF PAGE 236 =====
226 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
been remodeled on the present optative of ‘be’, in which such an outcome was
phonologically regular (see 3.5.1):
PIE opt. 3sg. ∗h₁siéh₁t ‘let him be’ (Skt syā́ t; cf. Old Lat. siet) >→ ∗esyēd > ∗ἐhjη
> εἴη.
There would have been no motivation for this remodeling until intervocalic ∗ y
was variably lost; thus the remodeling probably occurred well after PGk, roughly
in the Mycenaean period.
After consonants the inherited athematic suffix persists only in the Cretan
sigmatic aorist, e.g.:
αἰ δὲ κοσμησίɛ¯, ὄπɛ¯ δικακσίɛ¯,⁴⁴ αὐτὸν ὀπῆλεν διπλεῖ ‘if he should become kos-
mos (again), however he may judge, he himself is to owe double the amount’;
Buck 116.2, Dreros, 6th (7th?) century BC.
However, that is enough to demonstrate that PGk sigmatic aorist optatives were
constructed with the inherited athematic optative suffix (and note that in these
examples Siever’s Law has applied, as expected etymologically). The sigmatic
optative aorists in -αι- and -ειε must therefore be post-PGk innovations.
As I noted in 2.3.2, the augment ∗é, which behaves like a separate word in terms
of accent, is attested only in the eastern end of the Core IE area: Greek, Phry-
gian, Armenian, and Indo-Iranian. Its distribution in attested Greek is odd: in
Mycenaean it is mostly absent; in Homer it is optional in past-tense narrative, but
usually occurs in the gnomic aorist, which does not refer to the past; in later Greek
it is normally present in all ‘secondary’ indicative tenses in all functions.
The gnomic aorist is the key to understanding the augment’s development.
As Delfs (2006) demonstrated, the appearance of the augment in past tenses
and in the gnomic aorist, which have nothing in common semantically, is best
explained by the hypothesis that it originally indicated hearsay, i.e. statements for
which the speaker did not vouch personally; Delfs adduces a similar particle in
Wintu, an aboriginal language of California, which likewise developed into a past
tense marker. The fact that Greek attests both divergent functions of the augment
suggests that it might still have been an evidential marker in Proto-Greek.
On the other hand, the shape of the augment in Greek suggests that it had
already become a prefix in Proto-Greek. Before most consonants, including those
that were lost within the separate prehistory of Greek, it underwent no change;
⁴⁴ Buck’s δικασσίɛ¯ is a misprint; see the original publication, Van Effenterre and Demargne
(1937: 334).


===== PDF PAGE 237 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 227
but before laryngeals it underwent the usual contractions and compensatory
lengthenings, e.g.:
PIE ∗h₁ludʰéd ‘(s)he arrived’ (Toch. B lac ‘(s)he went out’, OIr. luid ‘(s)he
went’), with augment ∗é h₁ludʰed > Hom. ἤλυθε ‘(s)he came’;
PIE ∗é h₁est ‘it is said that (s)he was’ (Skt ā́ s ‘(s)he was’) > Dor. ἦς ‘(s)he was’;
PIE ∗é h₂aǵed ‘it is said that (s)he was leading/driving’ (Skt ā́ jat ‘(s)he drove’)
> ἆγε ‘(s)he was leading’ > Att.-Ion. ἦγε;
PIE ∗é h₃reǵsn̥ d ‘it is said that they reached’ >→ ὤρεξαν.
Strictly speaking it is not completely clear that laryngeals were still in place when
these developments occurred—conceivably the immediate predecessor of a form
like ἤλυθε was ∗é eludʰed or the like—but it is clear that these contractions,
which yielded lower mid long vowels in all the dialects, occurred long before
most other vowel contractions in Greek, which yielded higher mid long vowels
in many dialects. It seems reasonable to infer that, whatever its function was in
Proto-Greek, the augment had become part of the inflectional morphology and
was no longer an independent sentence particle.
4.2.6 Personal endings
Greek has lost one person-and-number ending altogether: there are no longer any
inherited 1du. verb forms, and the 1du. pronouns are (as expected) used with 1pl.
verbs; so far as we can tell, that was already the Proto-Greek situation. The unique
Homeric 1du. form περιδωμεθον ´ ‘let’s wager’ Il. 23.485 is obviously an innovation,
with an ending constructed from 1pl. -μεθα and 2du. -σθον (Chantraine 1973:
478); whether it ever existed outside of epic diction is undiscoverable.
In Classical Greek the primary endings are arguably the default set; otherwise
it is difficult to see why 1sg. -μι would have spread to the optative. However, it is
clear that the secondary endings were the default set in PIE, and they probably
remained so in Proto-Greek. I therefore begin with the secondary endings of the
active.
4.2.6 (i) Active secondary endings
The PIE endings and their expected PGk outcomes were the following:
sg.  1 ∗ -m ~ ∗ -m̥ > -ν ~ -α du. 1 ∗-wé > ∗-ϝε
2 ∗ -s> -ς 2 ∗-tóm > -τον
3 ∗-t ~ ∗-d>0 3 ∗-tā́ m > -τᾱν (> -την)


===== PDF PAGE 238 =====
228 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
pl. 1 ∗-mé > ∗-με
2 ∗-té > -τε
3 ∗-énd ~ ∗-nd ~ ∗ -n̥d > -εν ~ -ν ~ ∗-α
What is surprising is how many of the expected outcomes are actually attested in
Greek; evidently there has been no wholesale overhaul of the system. The 1du.
ending, like all 1du. endings, has been lost, with the result that 1du. subjects
default to 1pl. concord; when that happened is unrecoverable. The 1pl. ending
has acquired a final nasal and become -μεν, probably in PGk, since that is the
ending in all Greek dialects which preserve the 2ary ending; whether that has any-
thing to do (historically speaking) with Hitt. 2ary 1pl. -wen, 2pl. -tten is difficult to
say. The expected syllabic reflex of the zero-grade alternant of the 3pl. ending was
eventually remodeled to -αν (see 5.4.2 (i)), no doubt on the basis of the full-grade
alternant. That would have been most clearly motivated when word-final stops
were lost, probably well after the PGk period. Naturally the full-grade alternant
∗-énd was ‘colored’ by an adjacent laryngeal; thus such a form as Hom. 3pl. βάν
‘they went’ can be, and probably is, a direct reflex of PIE ∗ gʷh₂ánd ‘they stepped’
(underlyingly ∗/gʷh₂-énd/). In thematic stems the ∗e of ∗-énd was elided, yielding
3pl. ∗-o-nd > PGk -ον.
4.2.6 (ii) Active primary endings
The PIE endings and their expected PGk outcomes were the following:
sg. 1 ∗-mi >-μι du. 1 ∗-wós > ∗-ϝος
2 ∗-si > ∗-σι ~ ∗-hι 2 ∗-tés > ∗-τες
3 ∗-ti > -τι (> -σι) 3 ∗-tés > ∗-τες
pl. 1 ∗-mós > ∗-μος
2 ∗-té > -τε
3 ∗-énti ~ ∗-nti ~ ∗ -n̥ ti > -εντι ~ -ντι ~ -ατι
Once again many of the expected endings survive in attested Greek. Expected
∗-μος has been replaced by -μες, no doubt with the vowel leveled in from the
secondary ending. 2du. ∗-tés (Skt -tʰás) has been replaced by 2ary -τον—and the
result has been that the latter also acquired 1ary 3du. function, giving indirect testi-
mony that the original 3du. primary ending was also ∗-tés (Skt -tás). These modest
changes are common to all the dialects whose forms are attested and are probably
PGk. The 3pl. endings survive, except for the leveling of -ν- into -ατι (see 5.4.2 (i));
elision of ∗e in thematic stems yielded 3pl. ∗-o-nti > -οντι. The only ending which
does not survive unaltered anywhere is 2sg. ∗-σι ~ ∗-hι. The loss of ∗h, roughly in
the Mycenaean period, reduced the postvocalic alternant to ∗-ι, which was usually
extended with 2ary -ς to mark the form better as a 2sg. The failure of 2sg. ∗-σι to be
attested must be laid to the fact that consonant-final athematic stems are already
rare even in Homer.


===== PDF PAGE 239 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 229
The anomalous NIE thematic 1sg. ∗-o-h₂ survives in Greek as -ω. Thematic
3sg. primary ending -ει is best explained as a regular sound-change reflex of
∗-eti (see 3.4.6 with references). The loss of ∗t was early, as this ending is attested
(by implication) already in Mycenaean, in the sequence e-ke-qe e-u-ke-to-qe
e-ke-e ∗hέχει κʷε εὔχετοί κʷε hέχεhεν ‘she both is in possession of and solemnly
affirms that she is in possession of ’ (Aura Jorro 1999 s.v. e-ke).
4.2.6 (iii) Mediopassive secondary endings
The Core IE endings and their expected PGk outcomes were the following:
sg. 1 ∗-h₂a > ∗-α du. 1 ∗-wédʰh₂ > ∗-ϝεθα
2 ∗-th₂a > ∗-τα (∗-θα?) 2 ? ? ?
3 ∗-to > -το 3 ? ? ?
pl. 1 ∗-médʰh₂ > -μεθα
2 ∗- dʰh₂ué > ? ? ?
3 ∗-nto ~ ∗ -n̥ to > -ντο ~ -ατο
There has been much more innovation in this set of endings. The 2sg. ending has
been replaced by -σο > (∗-ho after vowels) everywhere, thus probably in PGk;
the 1sg. ending was apparently first replaced by ∗-μα, with -μ- leveled in from the
active. But in all the dialects for which we have evidence we find -μᾱν (> -μην), with
a syllable coda of unclear origin. What should have happened to the 2pl. ending
by regular sound change is unclear; it looks as if the outcome was at first ∗-θϝε, the
laryngeal having somehow been lost, with further regular development to ∗-θε and
then remodeling to -σθε (on which, see below). In any case the dual endings, 2du.
-σθον and 3du. -σθᾱν (> -σθην), were obviously constructed to -σθε on the model
of the active endings (-τον and -τᾱν, cf. 2pl. -τε). How many of these developments
had occurred by the PGk period is difficult to say, but they appear to be shared by
all the dialects.
4.2.6 (iv) Mediopassive primary endings
The Core IE endings and their expected PGk outcomes were the following:
sg. 1 ∗-h₂ay > ∗-αι du. 1 ∗-wósdʰh₂ > ∗-ϝοσθα
2 ∗-th₂ay > ∗-ται (∗-θαι?) 2 ? ? ?
3 ∗-toy > -τοι 3 ? ? ?
pl. 1 ∗-mósdʰh₂ > ∗-μοσθα
2 ∗- dʰh₂ué > ? ? ?
3 ∗-ntoy ~ ∗ -n̥ toy > -ντοι ~ -ατοι
Just as in the secondary endings, ∗-αι has been recharacterized as -μαι with active
-μ-; just as in the active, ∗-μοσθα has been remodeled to -μεσθα, well attested in
Homer. Once again the 2sg. ending has been replaced by ∗-σοι (> -οι) and 2du.,


===== PDF PAGE 240 =====
230 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
3du. -σθον have been remodeled on -σθε. But two details of these endings require
more discussion, namely the syllable coda -οι vs. -αι and the -σ- of -σθε.
More than thirty years ago the late Jordan Greenwald proposed (p.c.) a highly
plausible explanation of the -σ- of the 2pl. ending. We need to start with the
inherited 1pl. and 2pl. endings, assuming that the mp. 2pl. ending was ∗-θε:
active mediopassive
1ary 2ary 1ary 2ary
1pl. -μες -με(ν) -μεσθα -μεθα
2pl. -τε -τε ∗-θε ∗-θε
Since there was a clear difference between the 1ary and 2ary mediopassive 1pl.
endings, marked by -σ- in the former, it would have been natural for native learners
to extend the difference to the mediopassive 2pl. endings:
active mediopassive
1ary 2ary 1ary 2ary
1pl. -μες -με(ν) -μεσθα -μεθα
2pl. -τε -τε -σθε ∗-θε
However, since there had never been any difference between the 1ary and 2ary
active 2pl. endings, a later generation of native learners could have restored that
situation in the corresponding mediopassive endings by extending -σθε to sec-
ondary function as well, yielding the immediately reconstructable set of endings.
When this happened is impossible to say, but at least two statements can be made.
One is that the distinction between 1ary -μεσθα and 2ary -μεθα must have been
lost relatively late in the prehistory of Homeric Greek, since the poems preserve
both endings (though not their functions, using them interchangeably for metrical
purposes); thus the creation of -σθε need not have been very early, and its spread
to secondary function must of course have been later. The other is that the remain-
ing mediopassive endings beginning with -σθ- must have been modeled on -σθε.
Thus unless the creation of 1ary -σθε, at least, occurred before the PGk period it
is very unlikely that the entire set of attested mediopassive endings was already
present in Proto-Greek.
The identity of the diphthong in the coda of the singular and 3pl. endings is a
more difficult problem. Most of the attested dialects exhibit -μαι, -(σ)αι, -ται, -νται
~ -αται (or their reflexes, e.g. Boiotian 3sg. -τη, 3pl. -αθη), but Arkadian instead
has 3sg. -τοι, 3pl. -ντοι, and a 2sg. κεῖοι ‘you lie’ is attested on two nearly identical
curse tablets (Otto Hoffmann 1900: 101–3); Mycenaean concurs with 3sg. -to (see
4.2.6 (ii) for an example). Nearly all the older literature observes that these endings
could have been constructed to 2ary -(σ)ο, -το, -ντο and can therefore be innova-
tions. So far as I can see, that is still a possibility. However, it now seems clear
that the PIE third-person endings were ∗-tor, ∗-ntor (see 2.3.3 (iii)), and the most
economical explanation for the Mycenaean and Arkadian (and probably Cyprian)


===== PDF PAGE 241 =====
4.2 CHANGES IN VERB INFLECTION 231
endings is a straightforward replacement of ∗-r with ∗-y, yielding -τοι, -ντοι. In that
case the -αι of the other dialects can only have been leveled in from 1sg. -μαι, nec-
essarily spreading through a dialect continuum, since the dialects with -αι in all
four endings do not constitute a clade. A more definitive solution will depend on
the discovery of further evidence.
4.2.6 (v) Imperative endings
The PIE active imperative 2sg. was endingless, though it was sometimes extended
with an emphatic particle ∗-dʰ´ı  which was reinterpreted as a 2sg. ending in some
daughters, including Greek (cf. Hitt. īt = Skt ihı´= ἴθι, all < PIE ∗h₁idʰ´,ı  whereas Lat.
ī reflects older endingless ∗h₁éy). The other second-person imperative endings
seem to have been identical with the 2ary endings, and that has continued to be
the case in Greek.
The 3sg. imperative, however, was replaced in Greek by the displaced imper-
ative in ∗-tṓd, which in Greek is always 3sg. and does not indicate temporal
displacement. Other third-person imperative endings were constructed from that
inherited ending. It appears that ∗-tˉod was reanalyzed as ∗/-t-ˉo-t/, doubly marked
as 3sg., and a 3pl. ∗/-nt-ˉo-nt/, likewise with double marking, was constructed to
match it (Ringe 1997). That had already occurred when Osthoff ’s Law operated in
Greek (see. 3.5.3), because the outcome was -ντον in Lesbian, in Rhodian inscrip-
tions from Phaselis, and in Pamphylian (where it became -δυ by regular sound
change, Brixhe 1976: 21, 74). The loss of word-final stops must have been later
still.
3pl. -ντον is shown to be an archaism by its persistence in dialects on the edge
of the Greek Sprachraum that do not otherwise share innovations. Elsewhere this
ending was remodeled or replaced, necessarily after the PGk period, since the
dialects do not agree. The prehistory of third-person imperative endings will be
taken up again in 7.3.1.
4.2.6 (vi) Perfect active endings
The NIE endings of the singular indicative survive in Greek:
1sg. ∗-h₂a > -α
2sg. ∗-th₂a > -θα (see 3.2.1)
3sg. ∗ -e >-ε
2sg. -θα was mostly replaced by -ας on the model of the sigmatic aorist (in which
the 1sg. ending was also -α, though < ∗ -m̥ , and the 3sg. ending had become -ε), but
that must have happened long after the PGk period. Otherwise the Greek perfect
has adopted the endings of the athematic present. However, at some point the zero-
grade 3pl. ending ∗ -n̥ ti was generalized in the perfect; its reflex -ατι survives in the
northern West Greek dialects, and ∗-ąti must have been the PGk ending (unless
∗-ēr or ∗ -r̥ s survived, for which there is no evidence at all).


===== PDF PAGE 242 =====
232 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
4.2.7 Participles and infinitives
Like all the branches of Nuclear IE,⁴⁵ but unlike Anatolian, Greek has interpreted
∗-ónt- ~ ∗-nt- as an active participle suffix and ∗-mh₁nó- as a mediopassive par-
ticiple suffix; the NIE perfect participial suffix ∗-wós- ~ ∗-us- also survives, e.g. in
Mycenaean te-tu-ko-wo-a₂ ∗τετυχϝ´οhα nt. pl. ‘fashioned, made’.
Infinitives are another matter. All the Greek active infinitives seem to have orig-
inated as caseforms of NIE deverbal nouns, and some endings have plausible
Sanskrit cognates. The distribution of the suffixes -μεναι, -μεν, ∗-hεναι, and ∗-hεν
will need to be discussed in some detail in 5.3.2, and only in the light of that dis-
cussion can we suggest what the PGk situation was; but it seems clear that Vedic
Skt -máne and -ṣáni are roughly cognate with the Greek suffixes. Sigmatic aorist
-σαι is harder to assess because it is unclear whether its α spread from the indica-
tive; mediopassive -σθαι, whatever its antecedents might have been, has obviously
been remodeled to fit the mediopassive personal endings with -σθ-.
In spite of their nominal origin, all Greek infinitive endings are appended to
aspect-and-tense stems; it is reasonable to project that innovation into Proto-
Greek and impossible to say how it occurred in detail.
4.2.8 The accent of Greek verb forms
As is well known, the accent of verbs in the Attic and Ionic dialects—those which
are well enough attested to give us some confidence in the tradition—can be
described as follows.
1) all forms of the present indicative of ɛ˜̓ναι ‘be’ and φάναι ‘say’, except the 2sg.,
are enclitic;
2) otherwise finite forms normally have recessive accent before the operation
of vowel contraction, except that
a) the accent cannot recede beyond the augment; but
3) there are a handful of imperatives that do not have recessive accent, and
4) the accent of the non-finite forms (participles and infinitives) is not uniform
and must be learned.
It is interesting to confront these general rules with the rules governing the accent
of verbs in Vedic Sanskrit, which probably reflect the NIE or Core IE system (and
certainly the system immediately ancestral to both Greek and Indo-Iranian). In
subordinate clauses in Vedic the finite verb is accented, and if it occurs with a
preverb the two are univerbated; in main clauses there is no univerbation, and the
⁴⁵ On Tocharian, see now Fellner (2021).


===== PDF PAGE 243 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 233
finite verb is unaccented. Obviously the Greek rule (1) is a relic of such a system: for
some forms of ɛ˜̓ναι and φάναι the main-clause accentuation has been generalized.
But the Greek rule (2) is also a relic of the same system, at one remove: main-clause
accentlessness was generalized, and recessive accent was assigned to the accentless
forms. That makes exception (2a) informative: at the time when accentless finite
forms were generalized, the augment was still an independent particle, and it was
accented.
Most athematic stems must have been inherited with alternating accent, and
the accent of pf. inf. -έναι and ptc. - ´ως, fem. -υῖα must be a relic of that situa-
tion. Sigmatic aorists, however, should have been accented on the root throughout,
and in attested Greek their infinitives and participles still are (subject to general
restrictions on where the accent can fall); the infinitives and participles of thematic
presents and of futures exhibit the same pattern. However, thematic aorists and
aorists in -ή- were clearly accented on the stem vowel (cf. λιπɛ˜ν, λιπέσθαι, λιπων, ´
λιπου,˜ μιγῆναι, μιγɛ ̄́ς, as well as imperatives λαβέ, etc.; Smyth 1956: 143).
4.3 Changes in nominal inflection
The inflection of nominals underwent more change in Greek than the inflection
of verbs. The PIE accent-and-ablaut system survived only in relics, and there was a
modest reorganization of stems on the basis of stem-final segment. The case system
was also simplified somewhat.
4.3.1 Cases
Like all the daughters of Nuclear IE, Greek has lost the allative case, though at
least one and possibly several adverbs with originally allative endings survive. The
clearest example is
PIE allative ∗ǵʰm̥ áh₂ ‘to the ground’ + deictic ∗-ı´ > Hom. adv. χαμαί.
The other plausible examples are prepositions/preverbs; the one with the most
solid etymology is
PIE ∗kát(a)h₂ ‘down’ (cf. Hitt. katta) > κατά.⁴⁶
Greek has also lost the ablative case; in 1st-millennium Greek the only clear relics
of the ablative are a scattered handful of West Greek adverbs like
⁴⁶ The oxytonesis of this and other prepositions is likely to be a grammarians’ fiction, reflecting
underlying accentlessness. Note that when postposed this lexeme surfaces as κάτα (and so also other
similarly accented prepositions).


===== PDF PAGE 244 =====
234 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
Delphian ϝοίκω ‘from home’ DGE 323.C.23, -ω < ∗ -ˉod < ∗-oad ← NIE ∗-e-ad.
However, the Mycenaean data introduce an interesting complication. It seems rea-
sonably clear that the unambiguous inst. pl. -pi ∗-φι functions as an ablative with
some names of places (Hajnal 1995: 154–85), and it follows that in the Mycenaean
dialect there was at least a partial syntactic merger of the inherited instrumental
and ablative. That seems likeliest to have been prompted by the accidental syn-
onymy of o-stem abl. sg. ∗ -ˉo < ∗ -ˉod < ∗-oad (see above) and inst. sg. ∗ -ˉo < ∗-oh₁,
and in fact the Mycenaean o-stem ending -o can in some environments be plausi-
bly interpreted as such a syncretic ending (cf. Hajnal 1995: 247–72). The fact that
in 1st-millennium Greek dialects the ablative has obviously undergone syntactic
merger with the genitive strongly suggests that the ablative-instrumental merger
of Mycenaean was not shared with other contemporary dialects—and it follows
that the ablative was still a living case in Proto-Greek.
Evidence for the locative case in Greek is differently distributed but leads to
the same conclusion. No attested dialect of Greek distinguishes the dative and
locative functionally, but the distinctive consonant-stem singular endings ∗ -ey
and ∗-i are both well attested. While the former survives in the 1st millennium
only in compounds like Cyprian ti-we-i-pi-lo (Masson 327.8) = Hom. Διείφιλος
‘friend-to-Zeus’,⁴⁷ both endings are still in productive use in Mycenaean: the dat.
sg. of s-stems often ends in -e-i ∗-εh-ι, but that of other consonant stems usu-
ally ends in -e ∗-ει (cf. Bartoněk 2002: 225–72). However, the distribution is not
perfect, and it seems likely that ∗-ει was being replaced by -ι (Thompson 1997:
327–9). Since the competition between the two endings has not been resolved in
Mycenaean, it seems unlikely that the two had become isofunctional already in
Proto-Greek.
That the instrumental was a living case in Mycenaean has long been recognized
(see the discussions of Hajnal 1995 and Bartoněk 2002 with references). It thus
appears that Proto-Greek, like Sanskrit, still preserved a system of eight nominal
cases.
4.3.2 Accent and ablaut
The elaborate PIE system of nominal ablaut has largely been lost in Greek, and
many accent alternations have been leveled. It seems clearest to structure the
discussion around a number of examples.
Ablaut between ∗ ē̆ and ∗ ō̆ has been eliminated from Greek noun paradigms,
except for the innovative acrostatic neuter s-stems; for instance, Hom. γένος
⁴⁷ The manuscripts actually read Διίφιλος (as Wolfgang de Melo reminds me), and in principle the
apparent long ι could have been lengthened metrically as the third of five successive light syllables; but
the Cyprian name and a handful of others, such as Attic Διειτρέφης, show that it actually reflects the
late graphic confusion of ει and long ι because the two merged in the 3rd century BC.


===== PDF PAGE 245 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 235
‘lineage’, gen. γένεος preserves the ablaut of PIE ∗ǵénh₁os, gen. ∗ǵénh₁es-os
unchanged, and such nouns remain common in Ancient Greek.
Only the kinship terms and some other nouns in -ήρ preserve all three ablaut
grades: the lengthened grade (in the nom. sg.), the full grade, and the zero grade.
The paradigm of πατήρ ‘father’ (Skt pitā́ , Lat. pater, etc.) is maximally conservative
in that regard:
Attic Greek PIE
sg. pl. sg. pl.
nom. πατήρ πατέρ-ες ∗ph₂tḗr ∗ph₂tér-es
acc. πατέρ-α πατέρ-ας ∗ph₂tér-m ̥∗ph₂tér-n ̥s
gen. πατρ-´ος πατρ-ῶν ∗ph₂tr ̥-és ∗ph₂tr ̥-óHom
dat. πατρ-ί πατρά-σι (loc.) ∗ph₂tér(-i) ∗ph₂tr ̥-sú
voc. πάτερ ∗ph₂tér
It can be seen that even the 5th-century Attic forms are largely the reflexes of the
PIE forms by regular sound change and minor phonological and morphological
adjustments (desyllabification of ∗ r̥ at some point after ∗h₂ between consonants
had become α, generalization of gen. sg. ∗-os, loc. pl. ∗-su → -σι under the influ-
ence of sg. -ι, etc.). The retracted accent of πατράσι might be the result of Wheeler’s
Law (Probert 2006a: 91), though it could also reflect an innovative rule fixing the
accent on the second syllable of the paradigm (‘columnar accent’—the only plausi-
ble explanation for Skt pitr̥ˊṣu). The paradigms of μήτηρ⁴⁸ ‘mother’ (Skt mātá ̄, Lat.
māter, etc.), θυγάτηρ⁴⁹ ‘daughter’ (Skt duhitā́ ), and γαστήρ ‘belly’ are similar, the
last apparently for purely formal reasons. Homer preserves a similar paradigm of
ἀνήρ ‘man, male human being’ (Skt nā́ , PIE ∗h₂nḗr): sg. acc. ἀνέρα (with metrical
lengthening of ἀ-), gen. ἀνδρ´ος, etc., but also forms leveled in both directions (sg.
acc. ἄνδρα, gen. ἀνέρος, etc.).
By the Classical period most polysyllabic n- and r-stems had eliminated either
the full grade of the stem (thus sg. acc. ἄνδρα, gen. ἀνδρ´ος, etc.) or the zero grade;
note the following inherited examples:
PIE ∗ḱwṓ ~ ∗ḱuṓ ‘dog’, acc. ∗ḱwón-m̥ , gen. ∗ḱun-és (Toch. B ku, obl. kweṃ; Skt
´svā́ , ´svá̄ n-am, ´sún-as) >→ κύων, κύνα, κυν´ος;
PIE ∗poh₂imḗ(n) ‘shepherd’, acc. ∗poh₂imén-m̥ , gen. ∗poh₂imn-és (Lith.
piemuõ) >→ ποιμήν, ποιμένα, ποιμένος;
PIE ∗h₂áḱmoˉ ‘stone’, acc. ∗h₂áḱmon-m̥ , gen. ∗h₂ḱ(m)n-és (Skt á´smā, á´smān-
am, á´sman-as ~ á´sn-as) >→ ἄκμων ‘anvil’, ἄκμονα, ἄκμονος.
⁴⁸ Accent shifted to agree with voc. sg. μῆτερ for obvious reasons.
⁴⁹ Accent shifted to agree with ‘mother’.


===== PDF PAGE 246 =====
236 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
Among the latter group the dat. pl. (reflecting the PIE loc. pl.) occasionally pre-
serves an archaic zero grade; for instance, though most forms of ἀστήρ ‘star’ (Hitt.
hasterz, PIE ∗h₂stḗr) are made to a stem ἀστέρ-, the dat. pl. is ἀστράσι. Quite a few
of these nouns have leveled the lengthened grade of the nom. sg. through the entire
paradigm. An inherited example is
∗h₂ánkˉo ‘bend’ → ∗h₂ankṓ (cf. OE anga, OHG ango ‘goad’ with Verner’s Law
voicing) >→ ἀγκ ων´ ‘elbow’, sg. acc. ἀγκῶνα, gen. ἀγκῶνος.
Most striking are the agent nouns in -τήρ. More than forty-five are attested in
Homer (Risch 1974: 30–1), and in every single one the lengthened-grade η has
been leveled through the paradigm.⁵⁰ In all these leveled paradigms the accent has
been fixed on the same syllable in all forms (subject to the law of limitation). Since
it is clear that leveling proceeded on a lexical basis, we cannot know how far it had
gone in the paradigm of any given noun in Proto-Greek (except that it cannot have
gone farther than in our attested examples). But an instance of lexical split argues
caution:
PIE ∗léymoˉ ‘lake’, acc. ∗léymon-m̥ , gen. ∗limn-és, loc. ∗limén(-i) (cf. Toch. B
lyam, A lya¨m < leveled ∗limn) ̥ >→ λειμ ων,´ λειμῶν- ‘water meadow’ and
λιμήν, λιμέν- ‘harbor’; double zero grade reflected in deriv. (orig. collective)
λίμνη ‘pool’.
It seems clear that the full range of ablaut grades of this noun survived down
into the separate prehistory of Greek, and the same could be true of almost any
ablauting noun of this group.
By contrast, neuter n-stems in ∗ -mn̥ ~ ∗-mén- have all acquired recessive accent
in Greek (like other polysyllabic neuters—see below). The stem consistently ends
in -ματ-; the source of the -τ- is unknown (see e.g. Buck and Petersen 1949: 221
for some half-hearted suggestions). The few etymologically underived examples,
such as ὄνομα and στ´ομα, have been assimilated to the derived type, the former,
at least, with remodeling of its ablaut.
PIE i-stems and u-stems have developed somewhat differently in Greek. The
nom. and acc. sg. forms are uniformly -ις, -ιν and -υς, -υν, suggesting that pro-
terokinetic inflection has been generalized. But in the gen. and dat. sg. the most
conservative attested forms seem to be Hom. π´οληος, π´οληϊ. The latter is clearly
PIE loc. sg. ∗-ēy (< ∗∗-ey-i by Stang’s Law) plus ∗-i (again), and it seems clear
that the gen. sg. has been remodeled on that basis. The u-stem singulars are more
straightforward, with reflexes of gen. ∗-éw-os, loc. sg. ∗-éw-i. The plural endings of
⁵⁰ Of course it is true that many are attested only once or a few times (though only θηητήρ ‘critic,
connoisseur’ Od. 21.397 is attested only in the nom. sg.). But κρητήρ ‘mixing bowl’ appears forty times
in the poems and μνησ τῆρες more than 200 times in the Odyssey, always with η in the second syllable.


===== PDF PAGE 247 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 237
both stem types agree closely with their Vedic cognates—except that the dat. pl. has
been remodeled to -εσι, an outcome that probably was not present in Proto-Greek.
Among monosyllabic consonant stems PIE ∗dyḗws or ∗dyéws ‘sky, day; Sky-god’
(Skt dyáus) retains its original ablaut to some extent:
Greek PIE
nom. Ζεύς ∗dyḗw-s or ∗dyéws
acc. Δί-α, Dor. Ζῆν-α ∗dyḗ-m
gen. Δι-´ος, Dor. Ζην-´ος ∗diw-és
dat. Δι-ί, Dor. Ζην-ί ∗diw-éy, loc. ∗dyéw(-i)
voc. Ζε˜υ ∗dyéw
The Attic-Ionic dialects, at least, have leveled the zero grade of the root into the
accusative, but in at least some Doric dialects the original accusative survived, was
extended with the productive consonant-stem ending -α, and was then the basis
for a new gen. and dat. It follows that the inherited accusative still existed, proba-
bly unchanged except by sound change, in Proto-Greek. Most other monosyllabic
nouns leveled a single ablaut grade through the paradigm, sometimes with an addi-
tional lengthened grade for the nom. sg. and/or a relic dat. pl. with zero grade. The
following are typical:
PIE ∗pṓd-s ‘foot’, acc. ∗pód-m̥ , gen. ∗ped-és (Skt pā́ t, pā́ d-am, pad-ás; Lat. pēs,
ped-em, ped-is) >→ πṓς,⁵¹ π´οδα, ποδ´ος;
PIE ∗h₁dónt-s ‘tooth’, acc. ∗h₁dónt-m̥ , gen. ∗h₁dn̥ t-és (Skt dán, dánt-am, dat-ás;
Lat. dēns, dent-em, dent-is) >→ ὀδṓς, ὀδ´οντα, ὀδ´οντος;
PIE ∗nókʷt-s ‘night’, acc. ∗nókʷt-m̥ , gen. ∗nékʷt-s (Lat. nox, noct-; Hitt. nekuz
mēhur ‘evening time’) >→ νύξ, νύκτα, νυκτ´ος;
PIE ∗wṓkʷ-s ‘voice’ (Lat. voxˉ ), acc. ∗wókʷ-m̥ (Toch. B wek), gen. ∗wekʷ-és (?;
Av. vacoˉ) >→ Hom. acc. ὄπα, gen. ὀπ´ος;
PIE ∗ǵʰwḗr, acc. ∗ǵʰwér-m̥ (?) ‘wild animal’ (Lith. zˇve˙rìs; cf. Lat. ferus ‘wild’) >
∗χʷήρ >→ θήρ, acc. θῆρα;
PIE ∗bʰṓr ‘one who carries’, acc. ∗bʰór-m̥ (?) >→ φ ωρ´ ‘thief ’, acc. φῶρα;
φρήν ‘midriff, mind’ (etymology?), acc. φρένα, gen. φρεν´ος, pl. dat. φρεσί, Dor.
φρασί (with α < ∗ą < ∗ n̥ ).
As usual, we cannot tell exactly what the paradigm of each of these nouns was in
Proto-Greek. There are also isolated forms, especially in Homeric formulas, e.g.:
⁵¹ Hesykhios attests a Doric πῶς, but the context suggests that the transmission is faulty (Piwowar-
czyk 2015: 275). It is clear that a nom. sg. ∗pṓds existed, since otherwise there is no plausible source
for PGmc. ∗fˉot-; moreover, if Greek had inherited a nom. sg. ∗π ως´ (parallel to κλ ωψ´ ‘thief ’) it is easier
to understand why the Att.-Ion. nom. sg. is πṓς rather than ∗π´ος: the vowel was simply raised to bring
it into conformity with π´οδα, π´οδες, etc. But direct evidence for ∗π ´ως apparently does not exist.


===== PDF PAGE 248 =====
238 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
κατὰ ὦλκα ‘down the furrow’ Il. 13.707, εἰ ὦλκα διηνεκέα προταμοίμην
‘whether I could cut a straight furrow’ Od. 18.375 (note that in both
cases ∗ἄολκα can be restored, Schindler 1972b: 77) < PIE ∗h₂wólkm̥ , root
∗h₂welk- ‘pull’;
ἀλκὶ πεποιθ ως´ ‘relying on his defensive capability’ six times at line-end < ∗h₂l̥k-,
root ∗h₂lek- ‘protect’;
εἰς ὦπα ‘in(to) the face’ six times ←< PIE collective ∗h₃ṓkʷ ‘eyes, face’.
Such forms suggest that the ablaut of surviving PIE root-nouns was better pre-
served in Proto-Greek. There are also, of course, root-nouns that do not exhibit
ablaut in any daughter and probably did not in PIE; obvious examples are ἅλς
‘salt’ and μ˜υς ‘mouse’.
The accent patterns of consonant stems have been redistributed in Greek.
Nouns which remained or became polysyllabic in Greek usually acquired fixed
accent on one particular syllable; thus PIE monosyllabic ∗h₁dónt-s, ∗h₁dn̥ t-és
appears in Greek as ὀδṓς, ὀδ´οντος (see above). Conversely, nouns which remained
or became monosyllabic in Greek usually exhibit alternating accent, with the
accent on the gen. and dat. endings but on the stem in the other cases; thus
∗nókʷt-s, ∗nékʷt-s appears in Greek as νύξ, νυκτ´ος (see above). Two m-stems
whose inflection had been parallel in PIE diverged in Greek because one became
monosyllabic and the other did not:
PIE ∗dʰéǵʰˉom (< ∗∗-om-s) ‘earth’, acc. ∗dʰéǵʰˉom (< ∗∗ -om-m), ̥ gen. ∗ǵʰm̥ -és
(< ∗∗dʰǵʰ-), loc. ∗dʰǵʰém(-i) (cf. Hitt. nom.-acc. tēkan, Ved. Skt acc. kṣā́ m,
gen. jmás, loc. kṣámi) >→ Hom. χθ ων,´ χθ´ον-α, χθον-´ος, dat. χθον-ί;
PIE ∗ǵʰéyˉom ‘winter’, acc. ∗ǵʰéyˉom, gen. ∗ǵʰim-és, loc. ∗ǵʰiém(-i) (cf. Lat. hiems)
>→ χι ων´ ‘snow’, χι´ον-α, χι´ον-ος, χι´ον-ι.
Other nouns that have become monosyllabic and acquired alternating accent
include:
PIE ∗mḗh₁n̥ s ‘moon, month’, acc. ∗mḗh₁n̥ s-m̥ , gen. ∗méh₁n̥ s-os (Skt mā́ s, Lat.
mēnsis) >→ Hom. μείς (i.e. μɛ̄́ ς, Il. 19.117), μῆν-α, μην-´ος;
PIE ∗ǵʰésorˉ ‘hand’ (cf. Hitt. kissar): obl. stem ∗ǵʰesr- > ∗χεhρ- > χɛ̄́ ρ, acc. χɛ˜ρ-α,
gen. χɛ¯ρ-´ος;
PIE coll. ∗páh₂wˉor ‘fire’, gen. ∗ph₂un-és (cf. Hitt. pahhur, pahhuenas) >→
∗ph₂uṓr, ∗ph₂ur-és (cf. Toch. B puwar) >→ π˜υρ, πυρ-´ος.
With the last contrast ὕδωρ ‘water’ ←< ∗udṓr (Skt udā́ RV twice) ← coll. ∗wédˉor (cf.
Hitt. witār), which remained polysyllabic and acquired the recessive accent typical
of polysyllabic neuter consonant stems (gen. ὕδατος). As this last example illus-
trates, polysyllabic neuter consonant stems acquired recessive accent, apparently


===== PDF PAGE 249 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 239
by generalization from the very common acrostatic s-stems (such as γένος) and
the direct cases of proterokinetic nouns (e.g. neuter ∗men-stems and u-stems).
Occasional deviations from these rules show that they developed gradually, at least
partly after the Proto-Greek period.
4.3.3 Stem types: Nouns
Except that PIE m-stems have become n-stems in Greek (by leveling from endin-
gless forms in which word-final ∗-m > -ν; see 3.3), Greek has preserved most PIE
stem types and created a couple more. I will illustrate them with examples that
have exact cognates in other IE languages, to the extent that that is possible.
The number of masculine o-stems matched by clear cognates elsewhere is
considerable; note the following:
(post-)PIE ∗agʷnós ‘lamb’ (Lat. agnus) > ἀμν´ος;
PIE ∗áwlos ‘tube’ (Lat. alvos ‘belly’, Lith. au˜las ‘leg of a boot’) > αὐλ´ος ‘double
shawm’;⁵²
PIE ∗áydʰos ‘burning’ (Skt édʰas ‘firewood’, OE ād ‘pyre’) > αἶθος;
(post-)PIE ∗bʰāǵós ‘tree sp.’ (Lat. fāgus ‘beech’) > φηγ´ος ‘Vallonea oak’;
PIE ∗dólos ‘bait, trick, deceit’ (Lat. dolus) > δ´ολος;
PIE ∗dʰóh₁mos ‘thing put’ (Goth. doms ‘reputation’, OE domˉ ‘judgment’) >
θωμ´ος ‘heap’;
PIE ∗dʰuh₂mós ‘smoke’ (Skt dʰumásˉ, Lat. fumusˉ) > θῡμ´ος ‘emotion, spirit
(etc.)’;
PIE ∗éḱwos ‘horse’ (Skt á´svas, Lat. equos) >→ ἵππος (see 3.4.3);
PIE ∗ǵómbʰos ‘row of teeth’ (Skt pl. jámbʰāsas, OE camb ‘comb’) > γ´ομφος
‘peg’;
PIE ∗gʰórtos ‘enclosure’ (Lat. hortus ‘garden’) > Hom. χ´ορτος;
PIE ∗h₂áǵros ‘pasture’ → ‘field’ (Skt ájras, Lat. ager, Goth. akrs) > ἀγρ´ος;
PIE ∗h₂ónkos ‘(a) bend’ (Lat. uncus ‘hook’) > ὄγκος ‘barb’;
PIE ∗h₂ˊtḱosr̥ ‘bear’ (Hitt. hartaggas, Skt ˊkṣasr̥, Av. aršoˉ, Lat. ursus) > ἄρκτος;
PIE ∗h₃ósdos ‘branch’ (Goth. asts) > ὄζος;
PIE ∗kápros ‘male animal’ (Lat. caper, ON hafr, both ‘goat’) > κάπρος ‘boar’;
PIE ∗kʷékʷlos ‘wheel’ (OE hwēol) > κύκλος;
PIE ∗kʷólos ‘axis’ (Toch. B kele ‘navel’) > π´ολος;
PIE ∗negʷʰrós ‘kidney’ (extended in Lat. dial. pl. nefronēsˉ, etc.) > νεφρ´ος;
PIE ∗órsos ‘arse’ (Hitt. ārras, OE ears) > Att. ὄρρος;
PIE ∗ṓmsos ‘shoulder’ (Toch. B āntse) > ὦμος;
⁵² Occasional shifts of accent in this and other isolated words must be the result of lexical analogies;
I will pass over them in silence if I have no specific suggestion to make.


===== PDF PAGE 250 =====
240 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗stah₂urós ‘stake, pale’ (ON staurr) > σταυρ´ος;
PIE ∗swéḱuros ‘father-in-law’ (Skt ´svá´suras, Lat. socer) >→ ἑκυρ´ος (accent by
lexical analogy with fem. ἑκυρᾱ́ , the latter ←< ∗sweḱrúh₂ by lexical analogy
with the masc.);
PIE ∗táwros ‘bull’ (Lat. taurus) > τα˜υρος;
PIE ∗tórmos ‘borehole’ (OE þearm ‘intestines’) > τ´ορμος ‘socket’;
PIE ∗udrós ‘water-dwelling animal’ (Skt udrás; ON otr ‘otter’) > ὕδρος ‘water
snake’;
PIE ∗wésperos ‘evening’ (Lat. vesper) > ἕσπερος (on the rough breathing, see
3.5.5 and 6.2);
PIE ∗wl̥ˊkʷos ‘wolf ’ (Skt vrˊkas̥, Lith. vil̃ kas, Goth. wulfs) → ∗lúkʷos > λύκος.
A few masculine o-stems appear to be substantivized inherited adjectives:
PIE ∗albʰós ‘white’ (Lat. albus, Hitt. alpās ‘cloud’) > ἀλφ´ος ‘white skin disease’;
PIE ∗ ā́ peros ‘bank, shore’ (OE oferˉ, Middle High German uover) → adj. (?)
∗ ā́ peryos > ἀ̄́ πɛ¯ρος ‘mainland’ > Att.-Ion. ἤπɛ¯ρος;
PIE ∗neptiós ‘of grandsons/nephews’ (Av. naptiioˉ ‘descendant’, late Church
Slavonic netĭjĭ ‘nephew’) >→ ἀνεψι´ος ‘cousin’.
A few others are agent or result nouns of an originally productive type that have
acquired specialized meanings:
PIE ∗dʰóyǵʰos ‘shaped clay’ (Goth. daigs ‘dough’; cf. Skt dehı̄́ ‘rampart’) > τοῖχος
‘wall’;
PIE ∗sólkos ‘thing pulled’ (Lat. sulcus ‘furrow’) >→ ὁλκ´ος ‘furrow’ (by lexical
confusion with ∗solkós ‘thing to haul with’, which also survives as ὁλκ´ος in
Greek);
PIE ∗dʰrogʰós ‘runner’ (OIr. droch ‘wheel’) > τροχ´ος ‘wheel’.
There is at least one inherited feminine o-stem and another whose original gender
is doubtful:
PIE ∗snusós fem. ‘daughter-in-law’ (Arm. now, gen. nowoy; shifted into the ā-
stems in Skt snuṣā́ , etc.) > νυ´ος;
PIE ∗sámh₂dʰos ‘sand’ (PGmc masc. ∗samdaz > ON sandr, Middle High
German sam(b)t, etc.) > fem. ἄμαθος.
One clearly inherited example might have been either masculine or neuter:
PIE ∗misdʰó- ‘reward’ (Skt mīḍʰám ‘contest (for a prize)’) > μισθ´ος ‘pay, wages’.


===== PDF PAGE 251 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 241
There are few shared neuter o-stems, e.g.:
PIE ∗gérsom ‘brushwood’ (ON kjarr ‘underbrush’) > Att. γέρρον ‘wickerwork’;
PIE ∗h₂árh₃trom ‘plow’ (OIr. arathar) > ἄροτρον;
PIE ∗ksuróm ‘razor’ (Skt kṣurám) > ξυρ´ον;
PIE ∗méh₁lom or ∗mḗlom ‘animal’ (OIr. mı´l) > Hom. μῆλον ‘sheep, goat’;
PIE ∗pédom ‘footing’ (Hitt. pēdan ‘place’) > πέδον ‘ground’;
PIE ∗plówyom ‘boat’ (ON fley) > πλοῖον;
PIE ∗wérǵom ‘work’ (OE weorc) > ϝέργον (attested in Arkadian) > ἔργον;
PIE ∗yugóm ‘yoke’ (Hitt. iukan, Skt yugám, Lat. iugum) > ζυγ´ον.
One is difficult to reconstruct exactly:
PIE ∗(h₂)ˉowióm ‘egg’ (?, cf. Lat. ovomˉ) > ὠι´ον.
One is possible but not certain:
PIE ∗peróm ‘feather’ (?; OCS pero; cf. also Toch. B pl. parwa) >→ πτερ´ον (by
lexical analogy with aor. πτέσθαι?; but see Frisk s.v. with references).
Another is a substantivized adjective, possibly but not necessarily reflecting shared
history:
PIE coll. ∗énterah₂ ‘things on the inside, guts’ → neut. pl. (PGmc. ∗inþarˉo > ON
iðr) > ἔντερα.
Finally, two appear to be loanwords from an unknown source (or sources):
post-PIE ∗ mā́ lom ‘apple’ (Lat. mālum) > μᾶλον > Att.-Ion. μῆλον;
post-PIE ∗ pr̥ˊsom ‘leek’ (Lat. porrum) > πράσον.
Since Greek and Italic shared no early prehistory after reaching the Mediterranean
(so far as we can tell), these words must have been borrowed either early or from
a non-IE language family widely represented in the Mediterranean basin.
As is usual in IE languages, fairly few feminines in ∗-ah₂- have exact cognates
elsewhere, but at least the following can be cited:
PIE ∗bʰáh₂mah₂ ‘illumination’ (cf. Skt bʰāti ‘it illuminates’) → ‘clarification’ →
‘reputation’ (Lat. fāma) > φήμη;
PIE ∗bʰugáh₂ ‘flight, running away’ (Lat. fuga) > φυγή;
PIE ∗Hyéh₁gʷah₂ ‘strength’ vel sim. (Lith. jė́ ga) > ἥβᾱ ‘youth’ > Att.-Ion. ἥβη;
PIE ∗h₁roHwáh₂ ‘rest’ (OE rowˉ) > Hom. ἐρωή ‘lull, pause (in battle)’;
PIE ∗h₂ánkulah₂ ‘loop (in a cord)’ (PGmc. ∗anhulˉo > ON ál ‘strap’) > ἀγκύλη;
PIE ∗(h₃)migʰláh₂ ‘cloud’ (Lith. miglà, OCS mĭgla) > ὀμίχλη ‘mist’;


===== PDF PAGE 252 =====
242 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗krásnah₂ ‘moving water’ vel sim. (ON hrǫnn ‘wave’) > κρά̄νᾱ, Att. κρήνη
‘spring’;
PIE ∗kʷoynáh₂ ‘recompense’ (Av. kaēnā ‘punishment’, OCS cěna ‘price’) >
ποινή ‘weregild, penalty’;
PIE ∗nébʰelah₂ ‘cloud’ (Lat. nebula ‘fog’) > νεφέλᾱ > Att.-Ion. νεφέλη;
PIE ∗plˊ̥h₂mah₂ ‘flat hand’ (Lat. palma, OIr. lám ‘hand’, OE poet. folm ‘hand’)
> Hom. παλάμη;
PIE ∗póywah₂ ‘meadow’ (cf. Lith. pı´eva) > PGk ∗ποίϝᾱ ‘grass’ > Ion. ποίη, Att.
∗ποίᾱ > π´οᾱ.
Two are clearly collectives to o-stem nouns attested in other IE languages:
PIE ∗dh₂pn̥ óm ‘sacrificial meal’ (ON tafn ‘sacrifice’, Lat. damnum ‘loss’), coll.
in ∗-ah₂- > δαπάνη ‘expense’;
PIE ∗sóngʷʰos ‘chanting’ vel sim. (Goth. saggws ‘song’), coll. ∗songʷʰáh₂ >
∗honkʷʰā́ > ὀμφή ‘oracular voice’.
One originally proterokinetic h₂-stem became an ordinary ᾱ-stem in Greek:
PIE ∗sḱáh₂ih₂ ~ ∗sḱh₂iáh₂- ‘shadow’ (Skt cʰāyā́ , Toch. B skiyo; see Ringe 1996:
18 with references) > σκιᾱ́ .
Another underwent further developments. PIE ∗ gʷénh₂- ~ ∗ gʷnáh₂- ‘woman’
(OIr. ben, gen. sg. mná) was apparently regularized as ∗ gʷenáh₂ (OCS zˇena), and
that appears to be the source of γυνᾱ́ > Att.-Ion. γυνή (see 3.4.3). The rest of the
paradigm, however, is built to an extended stem γυναικ- which exhibits alternat-
ing accent. Schwyzer (1939: 582–3) suggests that the voc. sg. γύναι, which could
reflect an earlier ∗γύναικ (see 3.5.3), might instead be an inherited voc. sg. in ∗ -ay,
cognate with the Skt ā-stem voc. sg. -e—presumably the late PIE voc. sg. ∗ -a cre-
ated by loss of the laryngeal in utterance-final position (see 2.2.4 ad fin.) plus the
hic-et-nunc particle ∗-i; but that still does not explain the -κ-. In any case the sur-
vival of Boiotian βανᾱ́ (Corinna 664a.2), the first syllable of which must reflect ∗ n̥ ,
shows that the history of this word was more complex than can be reconstructed
from the surviving evidence.
Greek also exhibits an unusually large number of masculine ᾱ-stems, originally
identical in inflection to the feminines, but over time acquiring a nom. sg. in -ᾱς (>
Att.-Ion. -ης) and a gen. sg. in -ᾱο (> Att.-Ion. -εω; see 6.2). A large proportion are
fairly recent creations using an innovative agentive suffix -τᾱς (> -της), but there
is also a compound type that appears to be older. Buck and Petersen (1949: 2–3)
suggest that they began as exocentric compounds of fem. ᾱ-stems, so that Hom.
κλυτοτέχνης, for instance, is literally ‘whose τέχνη is κλυτή’; since some could be
associated with verbs as well (e.g. -νῑ́ κης with νῑκᾶν), they were reinterpreted as
agentives. But it is striking that Latin also has ā-stem masc. agentives, and they
are deverbal, at least synchronically (advena ‘newcomer’, agricola ‘field-cultivator,


===== PDF PAGE 253 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 243
farmer’, etc.); moreover, there is some evidence for ∗-ah₂- as an individualizing
suffix in Anatolian (Melchert 2014b: 260–3). It seems likely that the last word has
not been said about the origin of these masculines. In any case their formation
was (at least somewhat) productive in the various daughters of the family, with the
result that examples shared between subgroups do not seem to be discoverable.
Greek preserves a single inherited feminine noun in ∗-ih₂- ~ ∗-yáh₂-:
PIE ∗pótnih₂ ‘lady, mistress’ (Skt pátnī) > Hom. π´οτνια.
Of course it is true that Greek and Indo-Iranian probably began their develop-
ment as adjacent or nearly adjacent dialects at the eastern end of the Central IE
continuum, so this particular example might not be all that ancient. But the suf-
fix reappears in Celtic; for instance, Skt rā́ jñī ‘queen’ is cognate with OIr. rı´gain
(< ∗rīganī < ∗h₃rḗǵn̥ ih₂). The pattern of facts thus suggests that this example is at
least as old as Core IE. At least one other inherited noun has been extended with
this feminine suffix:
∗ánh₂t- ~ ∗ n̥ h₂t- ‘duck’ (Lat. anas, Skt ātı´s) >→ ∗ nā́ t-ya > Att. νῆττα.
Derived stems in ∗-uh₂- do not seem to survive (note that PIE ∗sweḱrúh₂, the
most securely reconstructable example, has been remodeled as ἑκυρᾱ́ ), unless an
example is:
PIE ∗gʰéluh₂(s) ‘tortoise’ (OCS zˇely) > χέλῡς.
PIE i-stems are mostly relics in Greek, with the exception of the action/result
nouns in -σι- < ∗-ti-. At least the following have cognates in other IE languages:
PIE ∗h₂ówis ~ ∗h₂áwi- ‘sheep’ (Kimball 1987: 189; Lycian acc. sg. xawã, Toch.
B āu ‘ewe’ (Kim 2000b), Skt ávis, Lat. ovis) > Hom. ὄϊς;
PIE ∗h₃órǵʰis ~ ∗h₃r̥ ǵʰéy- ‘scrotum, testicle’ (Av. ərəziš ‘scrotum’) > ὄρχις
‘testicle’;
PIE ∗h₃ḗgʷʰis ~ ∗h₃ógʷʰi- ‘snake’ (Arm izˇ, Skt áhis) > ὄφις;
PIE ∗pótis ‘lord, husband’ (Skt pátis) > π´οσις;
PIE ∗méh₁tis ‘measure’ (OE mǣþ) > Hom. μῆτις ‘plan’;
PIE ∗gʷémti- ~ ∗gʷm̥ téy- ‘step’ (cf. Lat. con-ventioˉ, Goth. ga-qumþs ‘assembly’)
>→ βάσις, Hom. ἔκβασις ‘exit’ Od. 5.410;
PIE ∗ǵénh₁ti- ~ ∗ǵn̥ h₁téy- ‘begetting, birth’ (Lat. gēns, genti-‘clan’ and nātioˉ
‘people, nation’) > γένεσις;
PIE ∗dʰéh₁ti- ~ ∗dʰh₁téy- ‘(act of ) putting’ (PGmc ∗dēdiz ‘deed’ > Goth. -deþs,
OE dǣd) >→ θέσις;
PIE ∗stáh₂ti- ~ ∗sth₂téy- ‘standing, place to stand’ → ∗sth₂tı´s (Skt stʰitı´s, OE
stede, Lat. statioˉ) > στάσις;


===== PDF PAGE 254 =====
244 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗bʰáh₂ti- ~ ∗bʰh₂téy- ‘speech’ (Arm. bay ‘word’) >→ φάτις ‘saying; oracle’.
(There is inevitably some uncertainty about whether a given noun in ∗-ti- is inher-
ited, since the formation was productive.) Greek also has a class of nouns in ∗ -oy-,
exemplified by πειθ ω´ ‘persuasion’, which appear to have been originally amphiki-
netic nouns with a nom. sg. in ∗ -ˉo; there are no full cognates elsewhere, but the
suffix and inflection of Skt sákʰā ‘companion’, acc. sákʰāyam are clearly cognate.
PIE action/result nouns in ∗-tu- do not survive as a class in Greek. Surviving
u-stem nouns are relics, of which a substantial number are neuter; the following
inherited examples seem secure:
PIE ∗bʰāǵʰus ‘arm’ (∗-ah₂-?; Skt bāhús) > πᾶχυς ‘forearm’ > Att.-Ion. πῆχυς;
PIE ∗ǵḗnus ~ ∗ǵénu- ‘jaw’ (Toch. A du. ´sanweṃ, OIr. giun ‘mouth’) > γένυς;
PIE ∗suh₃yús ~ ∗suh₃iw- ‘offspring’ (Toch. B soy ‘son’; see Ringe 1996: 61–3)
>→ Hom. υἱύς ‘son’;
PIE ∗ǵónu ~ ∗ǵénu- ‘knee’ (Skt jānú, Lat. genuˉ) > γ´ονυ;
PIE ∗dóru ‘tree’ (Hitt. tāru, Skt dāru ́) > δ´ορυ ‘spear-shaft’;
PIE ∗dáḱru ‘tear (i.e. eye-water)’ (Old Lat. dacruma, Skt á´sru with unexplained
loss of ∗d-) > Hom. δάκρυ;
PIE ∗ wá̄stu ~ ∗wástu- ‘settlement’ (Skt vā́ stu, Toch. A waṣt, B ost) > ∗ϝάστυ
‘citadel’ (Myc. wa-tu) > ἄστυ.
One is a substantivized adjective:
PIE ∗médʰus ‘sweet’ (Skt mádʰus), neut. ∗médʰu → ‘honey’ (Toch. B mit) →
‘mead’ (OE medu) > Hom. μέθυ ‘wine’.
One inherited u-stem has become a monosyllable:
PIE ∗náh₂us ‘boat’, gen. ∗ n̥ h₂wés (Skt náus, nāvás, Lat. nāvis) > να˜υς, νᾱ´ος >
Att.-Ion. νη´ος > νε ως.´
One inherited u-stem with a good external cognate seems to have been a loanword
from an unknown language, judging both from its double full grade and from the
mismatch in the accentuation of the cognates:
post-PIE ∗peleḱus ‘ax’ (Skt para´sús) > πέλεκυς.
Finally, the derived nouns πάτρως ‘father’s brother’, μήτρως ‘mother’s brother’
appear to be inherited stems in ∗-ωϝ- (cf. Lat. patruos), though not much more
can be said about them.


===== PDF PAGE 255 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 245
The number of neuter s-stems with cognates in other IE branches is substan-
tial. Two do not exhibit the late PIE acrostatic ablaut pattern (for discussion, see
Nussbaum 1986: 139–57):
PIE ∗kréwh₂s ‘raw meat’ (Skt kravı´s) > κρέας ‘meat’;
post-PIE ∗ḱérh₂s ‘horn’ > κέρας.
The remainder are of the familiar type well attested in all the most conservative
branches:
PIE ∗ǵénh₁os, gen. ∗ǵénh₁esos ‘lineage’ (Skt jánas, jánasas, Lat. genus, generis)
> γένος, γένεος > Att. γένος, γένˉος;
PIE ∗gʷʰéros ‘heat’ (Skt háras) > Att.-Ion. θέρος ‘summer, harvest’;
PIE ∗h₁régʷos ‘darkness’ (Goth. riqis; Skt rájas ‘empty space’, Arm. erek
‘evening’) > ἔρεβος ‘passage to the underworld’;
PIE ∗h₂ágʰos ‘emotional distress’ (Goth. agis ‘fear’) > Hom. ἄχος;
PIE ∗h₂ándʰos ‘plant’ (Skt ándʰas ‘herb’) > ἄνθος ‘flower’;
PIE ∗h₂ánkos ‘(a) bend’ (Skt áṅkas ‘(a) curve’) > ἄγκος ‘glen’;
PIE ∗h₂pélos ‘wound’ (noun; Toch. B pīle, A pa¨l) > ἄπελος ‘open wound’;
PIE ∗ḱléwos ‘fame’ (Skt ´srávas) > κλέος;
PIE ∗nébʰos ‘cloud’ (Skt nábʰas; Hitt. nēpis, OCS nebo, both ‘sky’) > νέφος;
PIE ∗pésos ‘penis’ (Skt pásas) > πέος;
PIE ∗sédos ‘seat’ (Skt sádas, ON setr) > ἕδος;
PIE ∗sélos ‘standing water’ vel sim. (Skt sáras ‘pool’) > ἕλος ‘floodplain’;
PIE ∗skélos ‘crookedness’ (Lat. scelus ‘crime’) > σκέλος ‘leg’;
PIE ∗srı̄́ gos ‘cold(ness)’ (Lat. frīgus) > ῥῖγος;
PIE ∗wékʷos ‘word’ (Skt vácas) > Hom. ἔπος;
PIE ∗wétos ‘year’ (Lat. vetus ‘old’ (!)) > ἔτος;
PIE ∗yéwgos ‘yoke (of oxen)’ (Lat. pl. iugeraˉ, a measure of land originally
defined by what a yoke of oxen could plow in a specified time) > ζε˜υγος.
One original neuter s-stem has developed a unique inflection:
PIE ∗h₂áwsos ‘ear’ (OCS uxo) >→ ∗ówhos (by lexical analogy with ∗okʷ- ‘eye’)
> South Greek ∗ o˜̓ϝος (cf. Myc. o-wo-we ∗οἰϝ-ωϝής ‘with a single ear (i.e.
handle)’; Aura Jorro 1999 s.v.) >→ Att.-Ion., Hom. οὖς, gen. οὔατος (i.e.
o˜̓ς, o̓̄ ́ ατος) >→ Att. o̓˜ς, ὠτ´ος (with productive alternating accent in a new
monosyllable).
Inherited non-neuter s-stem nouns are rare, but at least three can be cited:
PIE ∗kónis ~ ∗kénis- ‘dust’ (Lat. masc. cinis ‘ashes’) > fem. κ´ονις;
PIE fem. ∗h₂áwsˉos ‘dawn’ → ∗h₂usṓs (Skt uṣas̄́ ) > ∗hawhṓs > ∗hᾱϝ ως´ (preserved
in Doric) > Att.-Ion. ∗hη ως´ > Hom. ἠ ως,´ >→ Att. ἕως.


===== PDF PAGE 256 =====
246 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
One has lost its ∗-s- completely in Classical Attic:
PIE ∗mḗh₁n̥ s ‘moon, month’ (Skt mā́ s, Lat. mēnsis) > Hom. μείς ‘month’ (i.e.
μɛ̄́ ς), μην- → Att. μήν.
In addition, though αἰδ ως,´ ∗αἰδ´οh- ‘respect, self-respect’ has no exact cognates
elsewhere, its non-neuter s-stem suffix, unique in Greek, appears to be cognate
with the suffix of Lat. honˉos, etc.; that class of nouns probably ultimately reflects
amphikinetic collectives.
The n-stems are more evenly distributed between non-neuters and neuters. Of
the former at least the following examples are inherited:
PIE ∗ḱwṓ ~ ∗ḱuṓ ‘dog’, gen. ∗ḱun-és (Skt ´svá ̄ sún-as, ´) >→ κύων, κυν´ος;
PIE ∗poh₂imḗ(n) ‘shepherd’ (Lith. piemuõ) > ποιμήν;
PIE ∗ wr̥ ḗ(n) ‘lamb’ (Arm. gaṙn, gen. gaṙin) > ϝαρήν (preserved in Cretan) >
ἀρήν;
PIE ∗h₂r̥ sḗ(n) ‘male’ (Av. aršā) > ἄρσην > Att. ἄρρην;
PIE ∗h₂áḱmˉo ‘stone’ (Skt á´smā, Lith. akmuõ) > ἄκμων ‘anvil’;
PIE ∗h₂ánkˉo ‘bend’ → ∗h₂ankṓ (OE anga ‘goad’) > ἀγκ ων´ ‘elbow’;
PIE ∗léymˉo ‘lake’, loc. ∗limén(-i) (cf. Toch. B lyam, A lya¨m < leveled ∗limn) ̥ >→
λειμ ´ων, ‘water meadow’ and λιμήν ‘harbor’;
post-PIE ∗ǵʰéymˉo ‘winter’ (deriv. of ∗ǵʰéyˉom ‘winter’, see below; cf. Skt
hemantás) > χειμ ων;´
post-PIE ∗ḱı̄́ Hˉo ‘column’ (Arm. siwn) > κιων.̄́
One seems to have been a collective originally:
PIE ∗térmˉo ‘boundary, boundaries’ (Lat. masc. termoˉ ‘finish line’) > masc.
τέρμων.
Here, from a Greek point of view, belong the two PIE m-stem nouns:
PIE ∗dʰéǵʰˉom, ‘earth’, loc. ∗dʰǵʰém(-i) (Hitt. nom.-acc. tēkan, Skt loc. kṣámi)
>→ Hom. χθ ων;´
PIE ∗ǵʰéyomˉ ‘winter’, ∗ǵʰiém(-i) (cf. Lat. hiems) >→ χι ων.´
Two archaic nouns in ∗-men- survive in Greek:
PIE ∗h₁nḗh₃mn̥ ~ ∗h₁nóh₃mn- ‘name’ (Toch. B ñem, Skt nā́ ma, Lat. nomenˉ)
>→ ∗ἔνομα (cf. Lakonian Ἐνυμα-κρατίδᾱς) > Att.-Ion. ὄνομα;
PIE ∗stóh₃mn- ‘orifice’ (Hitt. istaman-‘ear’; see Melchert 1994a: 73–4) >→
στ´ομα ‘mouth’.


===== PDF PAGE 257 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 247
Most of the remaining inherited neuters exhibit the proterokinetic suffix ∗-men-:
PIE ∗dʰyáh₂mn̥ ‘thought’ (?; Skt dʰyā́ ma ‘meditation’) > σᾶμα ‘memorial; sign’
> Att.-Ion. σῆμα;
PIE ∗néwmn̥ ‘nod’ (Lat. numenˉ ‘presence of a divinity’) > νε˜υμα;
PIE ∗snéh₁mn̥ ‘thread’ (Lat. nēmen, attested once in an inscription as abl. sg.
nēmine) > νῆμα;
PIE ∗térmn̥ ‘boundary’ (Lat. termen) > τέρμα;
PIE ∗wésmn̥ ‘garment’ (Skt vásma) > ∗ϝέhμą > ɛ˜̔μα.
One which did not has undergone a unique development:
PIE ∗péḱtn̥ , gen. ∗pḱtén-s ‘comb’ (Lat. pecten) >→ masc. κτεν-, nom. sg. κτɛ̄́ ς.
PIE r-stems seem to have been non-neuter. Though they are relics in Greek (except
for the agent nouns in ∗-ter-), the inherited examples are part of the most basic
vocabulary:
PIE ∗ph₂tḗr ‘father’ (Skt pitā́ , Lat. pater) > πατήρ;
PIE ∗mah₂tḗr ‘mother’ (Skt mātā́ , Lat. māter) > μᾱ́ τηρ > Att.-Ion. μήτηρ (accent
of the nom. sg. leveled on voc. sg. μῆτερ; otherwise μητέρ- ~ μητρ-);
PIE ∗bʰráh₂tēr ‘brother’ (Skt bʰrā́ tā, Lat. frāter) > φρᾱ́ τηρ ‘member of a
brotherhood’;
PIE ∗dʰugh₂tḗr ‘daughter’ (Skt duhitā́ , Goth. daúhtar) > θυγάτηρ (accent as for
‘mother’);
PIE ∗dayh₂wḗr ‘brother-in-law’ (Skt devā́ , late Lat. lēvir) > δᾱήρ;
PIE ∗h₂nḗr ‘man’ (Skt nā́ ) > ἀνήρ;
PIE ∗h₂stḗr ‘star’ (Hitt. hasterz) > ἀστήρ;
PIE ∗Hyn̥ h₂tḗr ‘husband’s brother’s wife’, voc. ∗Hyénh₂ter (Skt yātár-) >→ Hom.
pl. εἰνατέρες (ει = ɛ¯ by metrical lengthening);
PIE nom. pl. ∗swésores ‘sisters’ (Skt svásāras) > ἔορες ‘(female) relatives’
(Hesykhios, apparently quoting from a psilotic text);
PIE ∗ǵénh₁tˉor ‘begetter, parent’ (Lat. genitor) > γενέτωρ.
In addition, there are a couple of root-nouns in ∗-r-:
PIE ∗ǵʰwḗr ‘wild animal’ (Lith. zˇve˙rìs) > θήρ;
PIE ∗bʰṓr ‘one who carries’ → ‘thief ’ (Lat. furˉ) > φωρ. ´
There is also an r-stem that has become a monosyllable by generalization of its
oblique stem:
PIE ∗ǵʰésˉor ‘hand’ (cf. Hitt. kissar), obl. stem ∗ǵʰesr- > ∗χεhρ- > χɛρ, ̄́ gen. χɛ¯ρ-´ος.


===== PDF PAGE 258 =====
248 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
In place of neuter r-stem nouns PIE seems to have had r/n-stems, with ∗r in the
direct cases and ∗n in the oblique cases. Some have become r-stems in Greek:
PIE coll. ∗páh₂wˉor ‘fire’, gen. ∗ph₂un-és (cf. Hitt. pahhur, pahhuenas) >→
∗ph₂uṓr, ∗ph₂ur-és (cf. Toch. B puwar) > → π˜υρ, πυρ-´ος;
PIE ∗dʰénr̥ ‘palm (of the hand)’ (OHG tenar) > θέναρ, gen. θέναρ-ος;
PIE ∗wésr̥ ‘spring(time)’ (Av. loc. vaŋri) > Hom. ἔαρ, gen. ἔαρ-ος.
Others have remained r/n-stems in Greek, but their oblique stems have been
extended, with ∗ -n̥ -t- > -ατ-, exactly as in the oblique stems of nouns in ∗ -men-.
The source of the ∗-t- remains obscure. At least the following are clearly inherited:
PIE ∗wódr̥ ‘water’ (Hitt. wātar), coll. ∗wédˉor, gen. ∗udn-és (cf. Hitt. witār) >→
∗udṓr (Vedic Skt udā́ ) > ὕδωρ, ὕδατ-ος;
PIE ∗Hyḗkʷr̥ ~ ∗Hyékʷn- ‘liver’ (Skt yákr̥ t, Lat. iecur with full grade generalized)
> ἧπαρ, gen. ἥπατ-ος;
PIE ∗ówdʰr̥ , ‘udder’, gen. ∗uHdʰén-s (Skt ū́ dʰar, gen. ū́ dʰn-as) > οὖθαρ, οὔθατ-
ος;
PIE ∗sókr̥ ‘shit’ (Hitt. sakkar; Wodtko et a. 2008 s.v.), coll. ∗skṓr > σκῶρ, gen.
σκατ-´ος;
PIE ∗pérwr̥ ‘knot’ (Vedic ∗párur → párus and párvan-, both ‘joint’) > ∗πέρϝαρ
> Hom. πɛ˜ραρ ‘end; rope’;
post-PIE ∗ ā́ mr ̥‘day’ (Arm. awr < coll. ∗ amˉ ̄́or) > ἆμαρ (cf. pl. ἀ̄ ́ ματα πάντα DGE
661.22 (Arkadian), Buck 59.A.12 (Lokrian)) > Hom. ἦμαρ.
One is attested only in the nom.-acc. sg.:
(post-)PIE ∗h₃ónr̥ ‘dream’ (Arm. anowrǰ, deriv. of a coll. in ∗ -ˉor) > ὄναρ.⁵³
A considerable number of other inherited consonant stems survive in Greek,
mostly without ablaut alternations; the following list is not exhaustive:
PIE du. ∗h₃ókʷih₁ ‘eyes’ (OCS ocˇi) > (→) Hom. ὄσσε (see 3.2.3 on the phonol-
ogy), and coll. ∗h₃ṓkʷ >→ Hom. acc. ὦπα ‘face’;
PIE acc. ∗wókʷm̥ ‘voice’ (Toch. B wek) > Hom. acc. ὄπα;
(post-)PIE acc. ∗snı´gʷʰm̥ ‘snow’ (Lat. nivem) > Hom. acc. νίφα;
PIE ∗pṓd-s ‘foot’, ∗pód- ~ ∗ped- (Skt pā́ t, pā́ d-am, pad-ás; Lat. pēs, ped-em, ped-
is) >→ πṓς, ποδ-;
⁵³ The ∗h₂- reconstructed in Wodtko et al. (2008: 303–6) seems uncertain to me. If we discount
the forms cited from Hesykhios, it rests only on εὐήνορα οἶνον Od. 4.622 if the latter means ‘wine
which gives good dreams’ (see the discussion and references, loc. cit.). But at Od. 13.19 we find εὐήνορα
χαλκ´ον, in which the adjective obviously must mean something else, and later poets such as Pindar
clearly took it to mean ‘good-man, brave, glorious’.


===== PDF PAGE 259 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 249
PIE ∗h₁dónt-s ‘tooth’, ∗h₁dónt- ~ ∗h₁dn̥ t- (Skt dán, dánt-am, dat-ás; Lat. dēns,
dent-em, dent-is) >→ ὀδṓς, ὀδ´οντ-;
PIE ∗nókʷt-s ‘night’ (Lat. nox, noct-) >→ νύξ, νυκτ-;
PIE ∗h₃nogʰ- ‘nail, claw’ (OE næġl), extended ∗h₃nogʰ-w- (cf. Toch. B pl.
mekwa, Lat. unguis) > ∗onogʷʰ- > ὄνυχ-;
PIE ∗dyḗws or ∗dyéws ‘sky, day’, ∗diw- (Skt dyáus, div-) > Ζεύς, Δι(ϝ)-;
PIE ∗gʷṓw-s, ∗gʷów- ‘bovine, head of cattle’ (Skt gáus, pl. gāvas ́) > βο˜υς, βο(ϝ)-;
PIE ∗ḱḗr, ∗ḱr̥ d- ‘heart’ (Hitt. kēr, Lat. cord-) > Hom. κῆρ (otherwise ∗ḱr̥ d-
extended as Hom. κραδίη, Att. καρδίᾱ);
PIE ∗ǵʰáns ‘goose’ > ∗χάνς, ∗χανh- >→ χᾱ́ ν > Att.-Ion. χήν;
PIE ∗sál-s ‘salt’ (Lat. sal) > ἅλς;
PIE ∗wih₁- ‘sinew, strength’ (Lat. vīs) > Hom. i̓̄́ς, inst. pl. ἶφι;
PIE ∗h₃bʰrúH-s ‘eyebrow’ (Skt bʰrūs ́) > ὀφρ˜υς;
PIE ∗dʰǵʰúH-s ‘fish’ (Lith. zˇuvìs, gen. pl. zˇuvų ̃) > ἰχθ˜υς (ἰ- unexplained);
PIE ∗súH-s or ∗ sū́ -s ‘pig’ (Lat. susˉ , ON sýr ‘sow’) > ὗς and σ˜υς;
PIE ∗múHs or ∗ mū́ s ‘mouse’ (Skt mū́ s, Lat., OE musˉ, ON mús) > μ˜υς;
PIE ∗mélid, ∗mlit- ‘honey’ (Hitt. milit, Luv. mallit) >→ μέλι, μέλιτ-.
Finally, there is the odd case of two Greek nouns with stems in -κτ-. One is clearly
a loanword from some substrate language:
PGk ∗ϝάνακτς, gen. ϝάνακτος ‘king, lord’ (Myc. wa-na-ka; Boiot. ϝάναχς, dat.
ϝάνακτι, Buck 37) > Hom. ἄναξ, ἄνάκτος.
It is not surprising that this noun has no cognates elsewhere. But the other one
apparently does:
PGk ∗γάλακτ, gen. γάλακτος ‘milk’ (Lat. lac, lactis) > γάλα, γάλακτος.
It seems unlikely that this is a true cognate pair, because its shape is unparalleled,
it appears in no other IE language, and the Greek syllable γα- is unaccounted for.
But if it is a loanword it exhibits the same startling distribution as πράσον and
μᾶλον (see above).
A major innovation among Greek stem types are the nouns in -ήϝ- (nom. sg.
-εύς). Since this Greek suffix almost certainly entered the language as a component
of loanwords (John Bennett apud Meissner 2016: 27–8), it is necessarily uncer-
tain whether any of the nouns existed in Proto-Greek, but a strong case that some
existed at some early stage of the language can be made. Nouns in -εύς are already
well attested in Mycenaean, most often as names of trades or professions (Bartoněk
2002: 279–83), e.g. ka-ke-u χαλκεύς ‘smith’, ke-ra-me-u κεραμεύς ‘potter’, i-je-re-u
ἱερεύς ‘priest’, but also including pl. a-pi-po-re-we (∗)ἀμφιφορῆϝες ‘two-handled
jars’ and the culturally important loanword qa-si-re-u ∗γʷασιλεύς, the title of a


===== PDF PAGE 260 =====
250 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
subordinate ruler. So far as our evidence goes, all Ancient Greek dialects exhibit
this formation, and a reasonable number of examples can be reconstructed for
Proto-Greek with due caution (including all those just adduced). Note also that
(1) nom. sg. -εύς, dat. pl. -ε˜υσι consistently exhibit the effects of Osthoff ’s Law (see
3.5.3), and (2) the sound-change outcome of original ∗-ηϝ-jέ/´ο- in derived present
stems is preserved in Elean as -ειε/ο-, but in the other dialects has been leveled to
-ευε/ο- (see 4.2.1 (v)). The latter pattern of facts shows that this suffix was part of
the language at the time when ∗-wj- > ∗-jj-, but that the present stems in question
were created early enough to have undergone leveling in most dialects by the time
they are attested.
4.3.4 Stem types: Adjectives
Greek adjectives with good cognates elsewhere in the IE family are overwhelm-
ingly either o-stems with ah₂-stem feminines or u-stems with feminines in ∗-ih₂- ~
∗-yáh₂-. The suffix of the u-stems is usually just ∗-u-, but there is a fairly large num-
ber of thematic suffixes, which I will discuss first. Inherited adjectives in which the
suffix is just ∗-o- are few:
PIE ∗néwos ‘new’ (Hitt. nēwas, Skt návas, Lat. novos) > νέος ‘young’;
PIE ∗sénos ‘old’ (Skt sánas, Lith. sẽnas) > Att. ἕνη καὶ νέᾱ ‘last day of a month’
(∗‘old and new (moon)’);
PIE ∗dl̥h₁gʰós ‘long’ (Skt dīrgʰás, Av. darəɣoˉ, OCS dlŭgŭ) >(?) Hom. δολιχ´ος
(see 3.2.3);
PIE ∗somHós ‘same’ (Skt samás) > ὁμ´ος;
PIE ∗ n̥ˊudros ‘waterless’ (Skt anudrás) > ἄνυδρος;
post-PIE ∗awtós ‘same, self ’ (Old Phrygian wen autun ‘himself, ἑᾱυτ´ον’) >
αὐτ´ος.
Other thematic suffixes are well represented. The Caland suffix ∗-ró- is naturally
common:
PIE ∗h₁rudʰrós ‘red’ (Toch. B ratre, Lat. ruber) > ἐρυθρ´ος;
PIE ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰrós ‘light(weight)’ (OHG lungar ‘vigorous’) > ἐλαφρ´ος ‘light’;
PIE ∗h₂r̥ ǵrós ‘white’ (Skt rjrás ̥ ‘shining; swift’) > ∗ἀργρ´οs > ἀργ´ος ‘bright’;
PIE ∗lugrós ‘lamentable’ (Toch. B lakle ‘pain, suffering’) > λυγρ´ος;
PIE ∗piḱrós ‘pointed; punctured’ (OCS pĭstrŭ ‘embroidered, multicolored’) >
πικρ´ος ‘bitter, keen’;
(post-)PIE ∗maḱrós⁵⁴ ‘thin, lean’ (Lat. macer, OE mæġer) > μακρ´ος ‘long’.
⁵⁴ The related s-stem noun μᾶκος > μῆκος ‘length’ and the Homeric superlative μήκισ τος ‘tallest’
seem to show that the root was ablauting and contained a laryngeal, thus ∗mah₂ḱ-; but as Frisk observes
s.v. μακρ´ος, all other related words exhibit a short vowel. I suggest that the oldest recoverable preform


===== PDF PAGE 261 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 251
One example is more complex:
(post-)PIE ∗h₁léwdʰeros ‘free’ (Lat. līber, Venetic dat. pl. louderobos ‘for (his)
children’) > ἐλεύθερος.
Though innovations are not usually shared by Greek and Italic, the double full
grade of this example suggests that it is not very ancient.
Verbal adjectives in ∗-tó- with external cognates are very numerous in Greek:
PIE ∗ mr̥ tós ‘mortal’ (Skt mrtás ̥ ‘dead’) > Hom. (Aiolic) βροτ´ος;
PIE ∗dʰh₁tós ‘placed’ (Skt hitás) > θετ´ος ‘adopted (child)’;
PIE ∗sth₃tós ‘standing, stationary’ (Skt stʰitás ‘having stood up’) > στατ´ος
‘standing, stalled (horse)’;
PIE ∗tn̥ tós ‘stretched, stretchable’ (Lat. tentus ‘stretched’) > τατ´ος ‘stretchable’;
PIE ∗tl̥h₂tós ‘lifted, liftable’ (Lat. lātus ‘carried, brought’) > τλᾱτ´ος > Att.-Ion.
τλητ´ος ‘bearable, endurable’;
PIE ∗str̥ h₃tós ‘spread out, strewn’ (Lat. strātus) > στρωτ´ος;
PIE ∗bʰidʰstós ‘trustworthy’ (Lat. fīsus ‘having trusted’) > ∗φιστ´ος → πιστ´ος;
PIE ∗ wr̥ h₁tós ‘said, sayable’ (Goth. neut. waúrd ‘word’) > ∗ϝρητ´ος > Hom.
ῥητ´ος ‘stated, specified’;
PIE ∗dh₃tós ‘given’ (Lat. datus) > θε´ο-δοτος ‘god-given’;
PIE ∗dʰugʰtós ‘produced’ (Skt dugdʰás ‘milked’) > ∗θυκτ´ος → ∗τυκτ´ος ‘fash-
ioned’ in Hom. εὔτυκτος ‘well-made’;
PIE ∗gʷʰn̥ tós ‘struck, killed’ (Skt hatás) > Hom. ἀρηΐ-φατος ‘killed in battle’;
PIE ∗ǵn̥ h₁tós ‘born’ (Skt jātás, Lat. nātus) > Hom. κασί-γνητος ‘brother’, lit.
‘co-gnātus’;
PIE ∗h₃r̥ tós ‘risen, up’ (Lat. ortus) > κονι-ορτ´ος ‘dust-cloud’;
PIE ∗ḱr̥ h₂tós ‘mixed’ (Skt ā́ -´sīrtas ‘mixed’, RV VIII.2.9) > ∗κρᾱτ´ος in Hom.
ἄκρητος, Att. ἄκρᾱτος ‘unmixed’;
PIE ∗nigʷtós ‘washed’ (Skt niktás) > ∗νιπτ´ος in ἄνιπτος ‘unwashed’;
PIE ∗bʰudʰstós ‘observable’ vel sim. (Skt buddʰás ‘awake’) >→ ∗πυστ´ος in Hom.
ἄπυστος ‘unheard-of ’;
PIE ∗ n̥ˊdʰgʷʰitom (ḱléwos) ‘imperishable (fame)’ (Skt ákṣitaṃ (´srávas)) > Hom.
(κλέος) ἄφθιτον;
PIE ∗éwgʰtos ‘solemnly spoken’ (late Av. aoxtoˉ) >→ Hom. neut. pl. εὐκτά ‘what
is desired’; Il. 14.98.
By contrast, those in ∗-nó- and ∗-wó- with probable outside cognates are relics:
PIE ∗Hiǵnós ‘holy’ (cf. Goth. swikns ‘pure’) → ∗Hyaǵnós (full grade reintro-
duced from the related verb; Skt yajñás ‘worship’) > ἁγν´ος ‘holy, pure’;
is ∗maḱ-, and that the Greek forms with a long vowel were created on the model of other post-laryngeal
vowel length alternations.


===== PDF PAGE 262 =====
252 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
PIE ∗negʷnós ‘naked’ (Skt nagnás; with dissimilation Av. maɣnoˉ) >→ ∗mogʷnós
(as in Avestan) >→ γυμν´ος (with metathesis);
PIE ∗gʷih₃wós ‘alive’ (Skt jīvás, Lat. vīvos) → ∗gʷyoh₃wós (full grade reintro-
duced from the related verb) > ζω´ος;
PIE ∗skaywós and ∗laywós ‘left(-hand)’ (Lat. scaevos and laevos) > Hom.
σκαι´ος, poet. λαι´ος.
Examples with various other thematic suffixes and full outside cognates are
likewise isolated:
PIE ∗ályos ‘other’ (Lydian aλa-, Lat. alius) > ἄλλος;
PIE ∗médʰyos ‘middle’ (Skt mádʰyas, Lat. medius) > μέσος;
PIE ∗h₂áǵrios ‘of meadows/fields’ (Skt ajryás) > Gk ἄγριος ‘wild’;
PIE ∗h₂(a)ntı´os ‘opposite’ (Goth. andeis ‘end’) > ἀντίος;
PIE ∗óywos ‘single’ (Av. aēuuoˉ ‘one’) > οἶος ‘lone’;
PIE ∗sólwos ‘whole’ (Skt sárvas) > ὅλος;
PIE ∗gʷʰr̥ mós ‘warm’ → ∗gʷʰermós (full grade reintroduced from the related
verb, cf. Arm. ǰerm) > θερμ´ος;
PIE ∗h₂(a)nkulós ‘bent, crooked’ (ON ǫngull ‘fishhook’) > ἀγκύλος.
Note also:
PIE ∗deḱsi- ‘right(-hand)’ (cf. Skt dákṣiṇas, Av. dašinoˉ) in ∗deḱsiwós (Weiss
1996: 212) > δεξι´ος, possibly with ∗-wó- by lexical analogy with ‘left’ (see
above).
Somewhat surprisingly, two contrastive adjectives in ∗-tero- have exact cognates
elsewhere:
PIE ∗údsteros ‘farther up/out’ (Skt úttaras) > ὕστερος ‘later’;
PIE ∗deḱsiterós ‘right (explicitly opposed to left)’ (Lat. dexter) > δεξιτερ´ος.
(See also neut. pl. ἔντερα in 4.3.3.) So does a pronominal adjective with the same
suffix:
PIE ∗kʷóteros ‘which (of two)?’ (Skt katarás, Goth. ƕaþar) > π´οτερος.
All these types of thematic adjectives must have been present in Proto-Greek;
others could have been as well.
Cognates of inherited u-stem adjectives are especially to be found in Indo-
Iranian and Gothic; some also have Latin cognates, typically in -vi-. Comparison
of the cognates’ ablaut grades strongly suggests that most of these adjectives were
proterokinetic in PIE (ablaut schema ∗´-u- ~ ∗-éw-) with feminines, likewise


===== PDF PAGE 263 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 253
proterokinetic, in ∗-éw-ih₂- ~ ∗-w-iáh₂-; different daughters have leveled differ-
ently. The following can be cited:
PIE ∗bʰénǵʰu- ~ ∗bʰn̥ ǵʰéw- ‘thick’ → ∗bʰn̥ ǵʰú- (Skt bahús ‘much’) > παχύς;
PIE ∗dénsu- ~ ∗dn̥ séw- ‘dense’ (Lat. dēnsus) >→ δασύς ‘shaggy, rough’;
PIE ∗dʰérsu- ~ ∗dʰr̥ séw- ‘daring, brave’ (cf. noun θέρσος) → ∗dʰr̥ sú- (Skt dʰr̥ ṣús)
> θρασύς;
PIE ∗gʷráh₂u- ~ ∗gʷr̥ h₂éw- ‘heavy’ (Lat. gravis) → ∗gʷr̥ h₂ú- (Skt gurús, Goth.
kaúrus) > βαρύς;
PIE ∗h₁ésu- ~ ∗h₁séw- ‘good’ (Hitt. assus; see Melchert 1994a: 63) >→ Hom.
ἐΰς;
PIE ∗h₁léngʰu- ~ ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰéw- ‘light(weight)’ (cf. Av. superlative rənjištoˉ
‘swiftest’) → ∗h₁ln̥ gʰú- (Skt ragʰús ‘swift’) > ἐλαχύς ‘little’;
PIE ∗h₁wéru- ~ ∗h₁uréw- ‘broad’ (cf. Skt comparative várīyas-) → ∗h₁urú- (Skt
urús) > εὐρύς;
PIE ∗krétu- ~ ∗kr̥ téw- ‘strong’ (substantivized in Skt krátus ‘power’) >→ κρατύς;
PIE ∗mréǵʰu- ~ ∗ mr̥ ǵʰéw- ‘short’ (Lat. brevis) → ∗ mr̥ ǵʰú- (Av. mərəzu-) >
βραχύς;
PIE ∗pláth₂u- ~ ∗pl̥th₂áw- ‘broad’ (Lith. platùs) → ∗pl̥th₂ú- (Skt pr̥ tʰús) >
πλατύς;
PIE ∗swáh₂du- ~ ∗suh₂déw- ‘sweet’ (Lat. suāvis) >→ ∗swādú- (Skt svādús) >
ἡδύς;
PIE ∗ténh₂u- ~ ∗tn̥ h₂áw- ‘stretched, extended’ (Lat. tenuis ‘thin’) → ∗tn̥ h₂ú- (Skt
tanús) > Hom. τανύ-φυλλος ‘with long/slender leaves’;
(post-)PIE ∗ṓḱu- ~ ∗ ˉoḱéw-⁵⁵ ‘swift’ (cf. Lat. comparative ociorˉ) → ∗ oḱú- (Sktˉ
ā´sús) > ὠκύς;
post-PIE ∗ gʷr̥ dú- ‘slow’ (Lith. gurdùs) > βραδύς.
One inherited u-stem has undergone unexpected developments:
PIE ∗pélh₁u- ~ ∗pl̥h₁éw- ‘much’ (Goth. noun filu) → ∗pl̥h₁ú- (Skt purús) >→
πολύς, πολλ´ο- (< ∗πολυ-λ´ο-?).
The o in the root of this adjective poses the same problem as that in δολιχ´ος (see
above).
Other inherited adjectives are isolated. Three have exact cognates in other IE
languages:
PIE ∗méǵh₂- ‘big’ (Skt neut. máhi) > μέγας;
PIE ∗pı´Hwˉo, fem. ∗pı´Hwerih₂ ‘fat’ (Skt. pı́̄ vā, fem. pı́varī̄) > πιων,̄́ fem. πιɛ ̄́¯ρα;
(post-)PIE masc. nom. pl. ∗ pá̄ntes ‘all’ (Toch. B poñc) > πάντες.
⁵⁵ The unexpected ∗ ˉo of this word undoubtedly conceals something more complex, but I see no
point in speculating about it.


===== PDF PAGE 264 =====
254 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
The extended stem μεγάλο- is obviously parallel to πολλ´ο-; presumably the same
process, whatever it was, gave rise to both.
The PIE participles in ∗-nt- are fully productive in Greek, and their formation
and inflection are unsurprising, with one exception: the thematic nom. sg. masc.
ends in -ων, which cannot be a reflex of ∗-o-nt-s. That appears to be an innovation,
though how it occurred is unclear (see the discussion of Schwyzer 1939: 566–7).
If it was created on the analogy of voc. sg. -ον and neuter nom.-acc. sg. -ον—the
simplest explanation—then it must postdate the loss of word-final stops (see 3.5.3).
Comparatives and superlatives can be ascribed to PGk with some confidence,
since they closely parallel the Sanskrit formations. The older comparative in ∗-joh-
~ ∗-ioh- and superlative in ∗-isto- had undergone no morphological changes; the
-ν- of Homeric and later comparative forms is not yet present in Mycenaean and so
must not have been in Proto-Greek. The later and more productive suffixes -τερο-
and -τατο- (the latter for expected ∗-ταμο-, cf. Skt -tama-; possibly remodeled on
-ιστο-?) can also have been in place in Proto-Greek.
4.3.5 Noun and adjective endings
The number-and-case endings of Greek athematic nouns preserve the PIE system
well, with some simplifications, as a confrontation of the two systems demon-
strates:
(post-)PIE Greek
singular
vocative -0 -0
nominative ∗-s ~ -0, neuter -0 -ς ~ -0, neuter -0
accusative ∗ -m ~ ∗ -m̥ , neuter -0 -ν ~ -α, neuter -0
genitive ∗-és ~ ∗-s → ∗ -os -ος
dative ∗-éy (Myc. -e; Διεί-φιλος)
locative -0´ → ∗-ı´ -ι (dative)
instrumental ∗-éh₁ (Myc. -e?)
plural
nom.-voc. ∗ -es -ες
accusative ∗ -ns ~ ∗ -n̥ s -νς (W.Argolic, Cretan, etc.) ~ -ας
genitive ∗-óHom -ων
dative ∗-ós → ∗-mós
locative ∗-sú -σι (dative, vowel from the sg.)
instrumental ∗-ı´s → ∗-bʰı´s (Myc. -pi, Hom. -φι, remodeled on -σι)
dual
nom.-acc.-voc. ∗-h₁e, neuter ∗-ih₁ -ε
As usual, the oblique dual endings are not reconstructable (even for Proto-
Greek). The only significant changes (aside from obvious levelings) are


===== PDF PAGE 265 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 255
the syntactic merger of dative and locative, and later of the instrumental
as well.
The prehistory of the Greek thematic endings is almost as straightforward:
(post-)PIE Greek
singular
vocative ∗ -e, neuter ∗ -om -ε, neuter -ον
nominative ∗ -os, neuter ∗ -om -ος, neuter -ον
accusative ∗ -om -ον
genitive ∗ -osyo Hom. -οιο, Thessalian -οι, otherwise -ˉo
dative ∗ -oey -ωι
locative ∗-ey → ∗ -oy Arkadian, etc. dat. -οι?
instrumental ∗-oh₁ (Myc. -o)
plural
nom.-voc. ∗ -oes -οι
accusative ∗ -ons -ονς (W. Argolic, Cretan, etc.)
genitive ∗ -ˉoHom -ων
dative ∗ -ˉos (?) → ∗ -oymos
locative ∗ -oysu Myc. dat. -o-i = ∗-οιhι (→ -οισι)
instrumental ∗ -ˉoys Myc. -o = dat. -οις
dual
nom.-acc.-voc. ∗-oh₁, neuter ∗-oy(h₁) -ω
It is unclear whether the dat. sg. in -οι attested in various dialects is the inher-
ited loc. sg. or the result of regular sound change (since there are virtually
no other examples of inherited -ωι). By far the most significant innovation
among these endings was the replacement of the inherited nom.-voc. pl. with
pronominal -οι.
As is usual in the daughters, collectives in ∗-h₂ and thematic ∗-ah₂ have become
neuter nom.-acc.-voc. plurals in Greek. Both the athematic and the thematic for-
mations end in (short) -α; presumably the athematic sound-change outcome has
been generalized. However, it is not clear when the reanalysis of these forms
as plurals occurred; Greek is (notoriously) one of the archaic IE languages in
which neut. pl. subjects trigger singular concord on the verb, suggesting that
they might have been grammatically singular far down into the prehistory of
Greek.
The prehistory of the ᾱ-stem endings is more complex, because (as in various
other daughters) they have been influenced by the thematic endings, undoubtedly
because of their association in adjective inflection. In this case a different con-
frontation is instructive (I give the maximally conservative non-Att.-Ion. forms of
ᾱ-stems):


===== PDF PAGE 266 =====
256 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
Greek o-stem Greek ᾱ-stem PIE ah₂-stem
singular
vocative -ε -α ∗ -a
nominative -ος -ᾱ ∗-ah₂
accusative -ον -ᾱν ∗-ām
genitive -οιο ~ -ˉo -ᾱς → masc. ∗-ᾱCο ∗-ah₂s
dative -ωι -ᾱι ∗-ah₂ay
locative Ark., etc., dat. -οι Ark., etc., dat. -αι? ∗-ah₂i
instrumental (Myc. -o) (Myc. -a) ∗-ah₂h₁
plural
nom.-voc. -οι -αι ∗-ah₂as
accusative -ονς (W. Argolic, -ανς (W. Argolic, etc.) ∗-ās
etc.)
genitive -ων ∗-ᾱ́ hων ∗-ah₂oHom
dat.-loc. Myc. dat. -o-i = Myc. dat. -a-i = ∗-ᾱhι ∗-ah₂su (loc.)
∗-οιhι → -οισι (→ ∗-ᾱσι)
instrumental Myc. -o = dat. -οις Myc. -a-pi = ∗-ᾱφι; ∗-ah₂bʰis
(→ -αις)
dual
nom.-acc.-voc. -ω Myc. -o, -a-e > -ᾱ ? ? ?
The endings of the singular are inherited, but many plural endings have been
remodeled. Nom. pl. -αι and acc. pl. -ανς (> -ᾱς) are modeled on the o-stem end-
ings, and since they occur in all the dialects (so far as we know), they can be
Proto-Greek innovations. The gen. pl. is more interesting. The PIE ending should
have contracted to -ων, becoming identical with the corresponding ending in all
the other stem classes; instead it has been replaced by the pronominal ending
∗-ah₂soHom > ∗-ᾱ́ hων (> -ᾱ́ ων > Att.-Ion. -ήων > -έων > -ῶν; all stages after the
loss of ∗h are actually attested). That too can be a Proto-Greek innovation. The
inst. pl. is still attested in Mycenaean, and a reflex of the inherited dat.-loc. pl. end-
ing appears in the fossilized form Ἀθήνησι, so those two endings must still have
been part of the PGk system, though in later Greek they were replaced by -αισι and
-αις, again on the model of the o-stems. The Myc. dual -o is presumably o-stem -
ω (pace Szemerényi 1966a: 217–22, whose suggestion does not fit etymologically
or structurally); the more transparent -a-e seems to be the source of Att.-Ion. -ᾱ.
Most striking is the innovative masc. gen. sg., appearing in Mycenaean as -a-o,
which presumably reflects ∗-ᾱhο, ∗-ᾱjο, or conceivably ∗-ᾱhjο. The new ending
was evidently created on the model of the o-stem ending, and since the latter could
have been analyzed as nom. sg. ∗-os + ∗-jo (see 3.6.3), a preform ∗-ᾱjο is plausible.
However, native learners do not necessarily work with analogical proportions, and


===== PDF PAGE 267 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 257
we do not know what would have happened to ∗hj, with or without a morpheme
boundary, after long vowels because this would be the only example. The inno-
vative ending can be ascribed (with due caution) to Proto-Greek, since the few
masc. gen. sg. forms in -ᾱς can be shown to be innovations (Morpurgo 1961). By
contrast, masc. nom. sg. -ᾱς is clearly post-Proto-Greek, since forms in -ᾱ survive
in outlying dialects (Morpurgo 1961: 105–6).
Finally, something should be said about the Greek dual gen.-dat. ending. The
most conservative forms are Arkadian: o-stem -οιυν, ᾱ-stem -αιυν (DGE 664).
They have no exact cognates in any other IE language. In Homer they appear
as -οιϊν, -αιϊν, apparently with assimilation of the υ; in later Attic-Ionic they have
contracted to -οιν, -αιν, and the former has spread to consonant stems. What the
situation was in Proto-Greek is unrecoverable.
4.3.6 Pronouns
The differences between noun and adjective inflection on the one hand and
‘pronominal’ inflection on the other have largely been leveled out in Greek, though
there are indications that the leveling had not become quite as complete in Proto-
Greek. The inflection of the determiner ‘that’ will illustrate; forms which have
undergone morphological replacement are parenthesized:
Proto-Core IE Greek
masc. neut. fem. masc. neut. fem.
singular
nom. só tód sáh₂ ὁ το´α ̄̔
acc. tómtód tam   ̄́τ´ον τ´ο ταν ̄́
dat. tósmey tósyah₂ay (τῶι) (τᾶι)
gen. tósyo tósyah₂s τοῖο / τõ (τᾶς)
dual
nom.-acc. tóh₁ tóy(h₁) ? ? ? τω´ (τω) ´ (τω) ´
plural
nom. tóy táh₂ táh₂as τοί τά (ταί)
acc. tóns táh₂ tas   ̄́τονς´ τά (τάνς)
inst. tṓys táh₂bʰis τοῖς (ταῖς)
gen. tóysoHom táh₂soHom (τῶν) τα ̄́ων
loc. tóysu táh₂su τοῖσι (ταῖσι)
The masc.-neut. forms with ∗-sm-, the fem. forms with ∗-sy-, and the masc.-neut.
gen. pl. have all been replaced; so have all the fem. pl. forms except the gen. pl.
Conversely, the masc.-neut. gen. sg. ending and the fem. gen. pl. ending have


===== PDF PAGE 268 =====
258 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
spread to all other o- and ᾱ-stem nominals. However, there is indirect evidence
that ∗-sm- had not yet disappeared in Proto-Greek, for which we must examine
the interrogative/indefinite pronoun:
Proto-Core IE Greek
masc. neut. fem. masc.-fem. neut.
singular
nom. kʷéy kʷı´d kʷı´h₂ τίς τί
acc. kʷı´m kʷı´d kʷı´h₂m̥ τίνα τί
dat. kʷésmey kʷésyah₂ay τέωι
gen. kʷésyo kʷésyah₂s τέο
loc. kʷésmi kʷésyah₂(i) (Cret. dat. ὄτῑμι—see below)
plural
nom. kʷéyes kʷı´h₂ kʷı´h₂es (?) τίνες τίνα
acc. kʷı´ns kʷı´h₂ kʷı´h₂n̥ s (?) τίνας τίνα / σσα
gen. kʷéysoHom kʷı´h₂soHom τέων / τίνων
loc. kʷéysu kʷı´h₂su τέοισι / τίσι
The feminine forms have been lost completely, as in Latin and Germanic. I have
given the Homeric forms of the gen. and dat. sg., which are clearly older than Clas-
sical τίνος, τίνι. Though a longer gen. sg. ∗τεῖο is not actually attested, it might have
existed, since it is a plausible model for ἐμεῖο ‘of me’, etc. (see below). The dat. sg.
and oblique plural forms have been built to the inherited gen. sg. Otherwise the
acc. sg. ∗kʷ´mı  >∗τίν, recharacterized as τίνα, has been made the basis of most of
the paradigm. Two remarkable archaisms have resisted the spread of the stem τιν-.
One is neut. pl. ∗kʷ´hı ₂ > ∗kjá, preserved in the second part of the Attic indefinite
relative ἅττα and in Od. 19.218:
εἰπέ μοι ὁπποῖά σσα περὶ χροῒ εἵματα ἕσ το
‘tell me what sort of garments he was wearing around his body’.
The other is the Cretan indefinite relative dat. sg. ὄτῑμι, of which the second part
can only be ∗kʷ´smiı  ←∗kʷésmi, demonstrating that ∗-sm- was still present in
pronominal inflection in Proto-Greek.
The only pervasive relic of pronominal inflection in Greek is neuter nom.-acc.
sg. -o < ∗-od. It is inherited in τ´ο and at least also in ἄλλο (cf. Lat. aliud), and has
spread to αὐτ´ο, ἐκɛ˜νο, etc.
The personal pronouns have also undergone extensive remodeling in Greek; a
number of inherited forms have been lost, and the duals and plurals have been
provided with full case inflection. So far as I can tell, the developments were the
following.


===== PDF PAGE 269 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 259
1st person
sg. nom. éǵh₂ >→ ἐγ ω´
acc. emé ~ me > ἐμέ ~ με
gen. méme ~ moy → ἐμεῖο ~ μεο, adj. ∗memós >→ ἐμ´ος
dat. méǵʰye ~ moy >→ ἐμοί ~ μοι
du. nom. wé
oblique n ̥h₃mé ~ noh₃ >→ acc. ∗νωϝέ > ν ω,´ >→ νῶε (Katz 1998: 206–10)
pl. nom. wéy
oblique nsmé ~ nos̥ > acc. ∗hąhμέ > Lesb. ἄμμε, Dor. α ̄̔μέ
As in Latin, the nom. sg. has been extended with the thematic 1sg. primary end-
ing of the verb. The acc. sg. survives without change, and the remaining sg. forms
have been remodeled to match it: the accented dat. sg. by backformation to the
enclitic form, the gen. sg. by addition of the ending of the interrogative pronoun
or the default determiner. A possessive adjective has also been formed to the inher-
ited gen. sg. and has then undergone dissimilatory loss of one of its ∗m’s (Cowgill
1965: 170, who also suggests ∗memós >→ Lat. meus by loss of the other ∗m). Of the
dual and plural only the accented oblique forms survive, reinterpreted as specif-
ically accusative; the nominatives and the enclitic oblique forms have been lost.
The stressed elements ∗-mé and ∗-wé have been redistributed, with the former
for plurals and the latter for duals (Katz 1998: 195–7). In the dual the accusative
form also acquired nominative function (conforming to the syncretism of all other
nominals); in the plural new nominative forms have been created in Greek, and
both in the dual and in the plural new gen. and dat. forms have been created. How
much of that had already happened in Proto-Greek is not recoverable, but if there
was a new nom. pl. already in PGk, it was probably the preform of Lesb. ἄμμες and
Dor. ᾱ̔ μές, with only ∗-s added.
2nd person
sg. nom. túh₂ > τύ → σύ (with loss of the laryngeal utterance-finally)
acc. twé ~ te >→ σέ ~ ∗τε → σε
gen. téwe ~ toy → σεῖο ~ σεο, adj. ∗tewós > Hom. τε´ος (Lat. tuos)
dat. tébʰye ~ toy >→ σοί ~ τοι → σοι
du. nom. yú
oblique uh₃wé ~ woh₃
pl. nom. yū́ (< ∗∗yúy ?)
oblique uswé ~ wos >→ acc. ∗huhmé > Lesb. ὔμμε, Dor. ʋ̄̔ μέ
The developments have largely been parallel to those of the first-person pronoun,
with two major differences. In the singular ∗tw- > σ-, and the resulting alternation
between τ and σ was adjusted (and eventually eliminated) in a variety of ways,
partly differently in the different dialects. In the dual, we find nom. acc. σφ ω,´ which


===== PDF PAGE 270 =====
260 THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROTO-GREEK INFLECTIONAL MORPHOLOGY
cannot possibly reflect the PIE form. Its origin remains debatable; for discussion,
see Katz (1998: 234–53) with references.
The pronoun (acc.) ἕ, etc., reflecting PIE ∗swé, can be reflexive in Homer but
need not be; it is at least possible that that is an archaism. Its forms are parallel to
those of the second person and probably were so in PGk. The corresponding plural
beginning with σφ- can only have been built to a inst. pl. (∗)σφι which survives in
Homer as dat. pl. σφιν (Katz 1998: 228–33); only that form is likely to have existed
already in PGk. The initial nasals of non-neuter accusative μιν and νιν have not
been given a satisfactory explanation.
4.3.7 Numerals
Greek is one of the languages which preserves PIE ∗sem- ‘one’, but the only form
that has not been remodeled is neut. nom.-acc. ∗sém > ἕν; masc. nom. ∗sḗm has
been replaced by more transparent ∗sém-s > ἕνς. The e-grade has been leveled
through the masc. and neut. paradigm. Mycenaean dat. sg. e-me ∗ἑμεί shows that
this numeral remained an m-stem far down into the history of Greek; leveling of
ν into intervocalic position (ἕνα, ἑν´ος, ἑνί) is a post-Mycenaean innovation. The
fem. direct forms ∗sémih₂, ∗sémih₂m̥ seem to have been remodeled to ∗smı´h₂,
∗smı´h₂m̥ (> μία, μίαν) early, but both the direct stem ∗hμία- and an oblique stem
∗siáh₂-⁵⁶ > ∗hιᾶ- must still have been present in Proto-Greek, because the latter is
the only plausible source for Lesbian and Homeric ἴα; evidently the dialects leveled
∗hμ- and ∗h- in opposite directions.
Greek preserves two nom.-acc. forms of ‘two’: Hom. δύω reflects PIE masc.
∗dwóh₁, while δύο is apparently endingless. Of course the uninflected form might
have lost its laryngeal utterance-finally, but if that is what happened it happened
before the daughters began to diverge, because forms in ∗-o are also attested in
other IE languages; see Cowgill (1985b) for discussion. In Homer this numeral
appears to be uninflected (Chantraine 1973: 260), but in later Greek it has a trans-
parent gen.-dat. δυοῖν, with alternating accent apparently on the model of ‘one’;
the same peculiarity has spread to ἄμφω, ἀμφοῖν ‘both’ (post-PIE ∗h₂n̥ tbʰóh₁;
Jasanoff 1976). Neither word has distinctive feminine forms, and that might be an
archaism.
‘Three’ and ‘four’ also have no distinctive feminine forms, but it is clear that
the inherited feminine stems in ∗-sr- have been lost (they survive in Indo-Iranian
and Celtic). Greek forms of ‘three’ are the regular sound-change reflexes of the
PIE forms (with -σί replacing ∗-sú, as always), except that the dialects exhibit a
strong tendency to syncretize the nom. and acc.; but since reflexes both of nom.
∗tréyes and of acc. ∗trı´ns occur (the latter in, e.g., Heraklean nom. τρῖς DGE 62.23
⁵⁶ With the syllabic alternant of ∗y by Lindeman’s Law; so also in ‘two’ below.


===== PDF PAGE 271 =====
4.3 CHANGES IN NOMINAL INFLECTION 261
and Cretan acc. τρίινς DGE 179.V.54), both forms must still have been present in
Proto-Greek. ‘Four’ exhibits the productive Greek consonant-stem endings and
its ablaut has been leveled, but the outcome is not the same in all dialects. The
widespread stem τεσσαρ- (Attic τετταρ-) looks like the sound-change reflex of NIE
∗kʷetwr̥ -; Doric τετορ- ought to reflect ∗kʷetwór-, but the ∗w has somehow been
lost. Possibly the key to that puzzle is the dat. pl. τέτρασιν attested twice in Pindar:
apparently postconsonantal ∗w was lost before ∗ r̥ and the -τ- was leveled through
the paradigm. But in that case the stem τεσσαρ- has also undergone leveling: the
∗w has been leveled back into its preform after being lost by regular sound change.
Evidently this numeral still preserved its ablaut alternation in Proto-Greek.
Higher numerals are for the most part sound-change reflexes of the NIE forms.
The discussion of Szemerényi (1960) is still valuable.
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0004


===== PDF PAGE 272 =====
5
The initial diversification of Greek dialects
5.1 Introduction
Since linguistic descent is defined by unbroken sequences of native language
acquisition, and since divergent descent from a common parent defines a family of
languages or dialects, an important endeavor in historical linguistics is the attempt
to recover the branching structure of a language’s diversification into daughters. In
a strict cladistic tree speechforms are grouped together only if they can be shown
to share a critical mass of innovations which are not easily repeatable and which
other related speechforms do not share, so as to demonstrate significant exclusively
shared history. The requirements that there be a significant number of innova-
tions, that they be not easily repeatable, and that they be exclusively shared are
intended, in the first instance, to exclude parallel development by chance, though
the motivation for the requirement of exclusivity is also a desire to find a ‘clean’
tree (if there is one) rather than a dialect network.
Though such a model of diversification is clear in principle—and should always
be tested on a dataset first because it is easily falsifiable—it often does not match
linguistic reality. If languages or dialects remain in contact as they diversify, they
can and usually do continue to share innovations after they have become distinct;
Ross (1997, 1998) is perhaps the best exploration of that phenomenon. Since the
dialects of Ancient Greek were obviously in contact for many centuries, this is a
major problem in assessing how the Greek dialects diversified.
Risch (1955) pointed out that attention both to cladistics and to the relative
chronology of changes could help clarify the diversification of the Greek dialects.
For instance, it is easy to show that the ‘second compensatory lengthening’ (2CL)
occurred in the Attic-Ionic dialects after they had begun to diverge from all the oth-
ers (Risch 1955: 64); it follows that the 2CL must have spread through an already
diversified dialect continuum. Unfortunately the relative chronology of changes is
often not recoverable, so that we cannot always determine which changes occurred
before any diversification and which spread through already diversified dialects—
and making ‘simplifying’ assumptions about contingent events, which could easily
have happened one way or another, is not good scientific practice. It should be
noted that the ability to reconstruct a potential parent dialect for a dialect group
is not automatically proof that the group constitutes a clade, both for the reasons
just discussed and because nearly identical parent dialects could have been (and
probably were) members of a dialect continuum, not cleanly separate ancestors


===== PDF PAGE 273 =====
5.1 INTRODUCTION 263
of clades; for valuable discussion of this and related issues, see Morpurgo Davies
(1992) and Rau (2018, 2022). We need to consider whether we are willing to accept
subgroups that might have coalesced after an initial period of modest divergence.
I will return to this question in considering an Aiolic subgroup in 5.2 and a South
Greek subgroup in 5.3.
Though my judgments of particular pieces of evidence are (perhaps inevitably)
different from those of other scholars, so that we do not always agree in detail, the
general picture that is sketched below—modest initial divergence followed by the
extensive spread of innovations through a dialect continuum—is comparable to
the conclusions of colleagues cited above, as well as those of Meier-Bru¨gger (2005)
and Hajnal (2007); cf. also Garcı´a-Ramón (2018: 99). For an exploration of this
problem using computational cladistic methods, see Skelton (2015).
It seems to me that two identifiable groups of dialects require only a summary
discussion.
I doubt that West Greek, or any of its potential subgroups, shares a critical mass
of distinctive innovations that would justify recognizing it as a coherent clade
exclusively sharing history. Of the common West Greek characteristics listed in
Thumb and Kieckers (1932: 70–4), Buck (1955: 154–5), and Thompson (2008:
761–3), a good many are actually archaisms (often shared with non-West Greek
dialects); some, such as the paradigms π´ολις,  gen. π´ολιος,  etc. (replacing inherited
π´οληος, etc.), and -εύς, gen. -έος, etc. (replacing inherited -ῆος, etc.), the spread of
σ-aοrist -ξαι at the expense of -σσαι, the spread of the future in -σέε¯ν (see Ruijgh
2007: 422–3 with references), and the active endings of the future passive (Buck
1955: 117) are the results of natural and repeatable changes (again typically shared
with other dialects, at least to some extent); and the contractions of vowels in hia-
tus are known to have occurred at a late prehistoric stage, when the dialects must
already have been differentiated. The best support for a West Greek group comes
from lexical peculiarities such as πρᾶτος ‘first’ and τέτορες ‘four’, of which the latter
shows an unexpected loss of ∗w after ∗t; but since lexemes are the most easily bor-
rowable components of a language, such support is always relatively weak. Other
traits of West Greek will be adduced in the appropriate places below.
Support for an Arkado-Cyprian clade is no better, in spite of the statements
of Buck (1955: 144), Thumb and Scherer (1959: 110), Colvin (2014: 99–100), and
other scholars. Many features of Arkadian and Cyprian are shared with Attic-Ionic
and are characteristic of South Greek (see 5.3). Kάς ‘and’ and π´ος ‘toward, at’ rep-
resent not positive innovations but loss of the alternatives καί and πρ´ος, which
were also present in Proto-Greek and South Greek respectively; and since loss
is by far the most easily repeatable type of change, it cannot count for much in
subgrouping. The raising of ∗ε before nasals and of ∗o word-finally are trivial pho-
netic changes that are easily repeatable. We are left with ὄνυ ‘this’, nom. sg. ἱερής
(for ἱερεύς), and the fact that prepositions meaning ‘from’ govern the dative rather
than the genitive (Janko 2018: 113)—not extensive support for a dialect group.


===== PDF PAGE 274 =====
264 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
Two other dialect groups require much more discussion, namely Aiolic, which
includes Lesbian, Thessalian, and Boiotian (plus the Aiolic component of the
Homeric oral poetic tradition), and South Greek, which includes at least Myce-
naean, Arkadian, Cyprian, and Attic-Ionic. I will discuss those two dialect groups
in turn.
5.2 Aiolic
5.2.1 Evidence for an Aiolic group
Two recent treatments of the Aiolic dialect group come to diametrically opposite
conclusions, as follows.
Parker (2008) raises the question of whether Aiolic is a viable subgroup at all.
He identifies seven characteristics that could provide solid support for an Aiolic
clade (Parker 2008: 444–6):
among regular sound changes, ∗ r̥ > ρο ~ ορ; labiovelars > labials even before
e- vowels; ∗VRh, ∗VhR, ∗VRj > VRR;
in inflectional morphology, dat. pl. -εσσι; pf. ptc. -οντ-; fem. ἴα ‘one’;
in derivational morphology, patronymic adjectives in -ιος.
As Parker notes, many of these characteristics provide only weak support for an
Aiolic clade, as follows.
The patronymics in -ιος are probably an archaism (cf. Debrunner 1917: 142,
Buck 1955: 134). Parker argues that the ‘double sonorant’ outcome of h-clusters
(which is not shared by Boiotian) is likewise an archaism; I will discuss that issue
at length in 5.2.2 below. In addition, he maintains that the labial outcomes of
labiovelars before e-vowels could also reflect failure to undergo a sound change.
The development of labiovelars will be treated in greater detail in 5.4.1, but the
pattern of reflexes shows that, except for ∗kʷ before high front vowels, labials were
the default outcome, appearing in all dialects except before mid front vowels (with
rare exceptions). The most economical scenario that can account for the messy
pattern of facts seems to be:
1) before front vowels, labiovelars developed allomorphs (probably palatal-
ized) that would eventually develop into dentals, but
1a) as the new allomorphs spread through the dialect continuum they
failed to spread completely to the Aiolic dialects and to Cyprian;
2) then all unaffected labiovelars became labials, the change spreading across
the Greek Sprachraum.


===== PDF PAGE 275 =====
5.2 AIOLIC 265
It should follow that the Aiolic dialects share an archaism, not an innovation, in
this detail too (Parker 2008: 445–6). The reflex of ∗ r̥ with o, as opposed to α, is
obviously not an archaism, but it is not restricted to the Aiolic dialects (Buck 1955:
20, Morpurgo Davies 1968, Parker 2008: 446–7), and such a simple sound change
is clearly repeatable.
The remaining characteristics are more interesting. Fem. ἴα ‘one’, as opposed
to μία, reflects leveling in an inherited paradigm (Parker 2008: 448–50; see 4.3.7),
and while leveling is of course a repeatable change, it is striking that only the Aiolic
dialects have leveled in this direction. Remodeling of the active perfect participles
in these dialects with present/aorist thematic -οντ-, replacing -´οτ- ~ -υίᾱ-, might
actually be expected on general grounds; but why didn’t the other dialects par-
ticipate in this obvious leveling? And while dat. pl. -εσσι is not restricted to the
Aiolic dialects, most of the dialects that exhibit such an ending form a coherent
area, extending from Lesbian through Thessalian and Boiotian into northern West
Greek, suggesting that there is some historical connection between them. While
Parker is right to maintain that these innovations are not sufficient to establish an
Aiolic clade in the strictest sense, it is hard to believe that they do not reveal shared
history of some sort.
Parker used established diagnostics for subgrouping in his study; Scarbor-
ough, by contrast, employs a new and promising probabilistic method (Scarbor-
ough 2016: 185–209). He estimates the probability of each innovation occurring
(pp. 188–95) based on its actual incidence in the nineteen Greek dialects exempli-
fied in Buck (1955) (Scarborough 2016: 194–7), then multiplies the probabilities of
those innovations shared by all the Aiolic dialects; the result is a statistical demon-
stration that the isogloss bundle that distinguishes Aiolic is unlikely to be due to
chance (pp. 198–9). Since estimates of the probability of each innovation occur-
ring independently are (other things being equal) a better alternative to simply
rejecting innovations as evidence if they seem too easily repeatable,¹ it seems clear
that Scarborough has demonstrated probable shared history of some sort between
the Lesbian, Thessalian, and Boiotian dialects.
I suggest that both Parker and Scarborough are correct, depending on how the
question is framed. It does not seem possible to establish an Aiolic clade in the
strict sense, especially since we cannot demonstrate that the shared innovations
occurred earlier than those that are not shared by all three dialects. However, the
Aiolic dialects did share some innovations, not by accident but as historically single
events.
¹ The only potential problem is that all the Greek dialects were in contact for centuries, so that an
estimate of independent ‘innovability’ based on the incidence of an innovation among the dialects
might be inaccurate by an unknown margin. Scarborough is aware of this (p. 191), but (a) it isn’t clear
how to get a better estimate, and (b) since all probabilities fall between 0 (impossible) and 1 (certain),
the product of all the estimates is unlikely to be off by as much as an order of magnitude.


===== PDF PAGE 276 =====
266 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
The basic problem is the one mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 3: given
that the dialects had all been in contact for a long time, we are often unable
to distinguish between changes that occurred in a unitary parent dialect, before
divergence, and those that spread later through an already differentiated dialect
continuum. This problem is not peculiar to any one approach; it bedevils every
attempt to classify the Greek dialects by any method. Demanding exclusively
shared innovations is intended, in part, to obviate this problem; but it seems clear
that such a strategy is not very effective in the context of a dialect continuum.
In the remainder of this book I will treat the Aiolic dialects as a historically
definable group, with the explicit understanding that they might not be a clade,
strictly speaking.
5.2.2 The first compensatory lengthening
The outcome of ∗VRh, ∗VhR, and ∗VRj-clusters, except for ∗VRj after ∗a and ∗o and
for ∗Vlj (see 3.6.3), is a geminate sonorant (VRR) in Lesbian and Thessalian, but
not in Boiotian; in Boiotian, as in all the other dialects, these clusters are reduced to
single sonorants and the preceding vowel is lengthened by the ‘first compensatory
lengthening’ (1CL; see Bechtel 1921: 240–1). The following examples are typical
(Buck 1955: 65–7, Lejeune 1972: 121–3, 125–6, 128–9):²
PIE ∗h₁esmi ‘I am’ (Skt asmi) > ∗esmi > ∗ἐhμι > Hom., Att., Boiot., etc., ε̄̓ μι but
Lesb. ἐμμι;
PIE ∗wésmn̥ ‘garment’ (Skt vásma) > ∗ϝέhμą > Hom., Att. ε˜̔ μα but Lesb. pl.
ἔμματα (Sappho 62.12);
PIE ∗ n̥ smé ‘us’ (Skt asmā́ n) > ∗ąhμέ > Dor. ᾱ̔ μέ but Lesb. ἄμμε, Thess. ἀμμέ;
PIE ∗krásnah₂ ‘moving water’ vel sim. (ON hrǫnn ‘wave’) > ∗κράhνᾱ > Dor.,
Ark. κρᾱ́ νᾱ ‘spring’, Att. κρήνη, but Lesb. acc. κράννᾱν (Alkaios 150.5);
PIE ∗h₁régʷes- ‘darkness’ (Goth. riqis) in pre-Gk ∗ἐρεγʷεh-ν´ο- ‘dark’ > Hom.
(Aiolic) (νὺξ) ἐρεβεννή;
pre-Gk ∗φαϝεh-νο-´ ‘shining’ > Hom. φαε¯ν´ος but Lesb. neut. φάεννον (Sappho
34.2);
pre-Gk ∗σελάhνᾱ ‘moon’ (cf. σέλας ‘torch’) > Dor. σελᾱ́ νᾱ, Att.-Ion. σελήνη but
Lesb. σελάννᾱ;
(post-)PIE ∗ǵʰéslom ‘thousand’ (Skt sa-hásram), deriv. ∗ǵʰéslio- > ∗χέhλιο- >
Ion. gen. pl. χειλίων (ει = ε¯) DGE 688.D.12, Lakonian acc. pl. τρισχε¯λίōς
DGE 13.20, acc. pl. fem. Boiot. χειλίᾱς DGE 467.15 but Thess. χέλλιας DGE
614.29;
² A problem is Att. αὗος, Ion. αὖος ‘dry, dried out’. It is hard to believe that it is not cognate with
Lith. sau˜sas and OE sēar, reflecting ∗sáwsos or the like; but ∗aws ought to have become ∗awh and then
∗ᾱϝ, etc., unless it had been subject to analogical remodeling. For discussion, see Berg and Lindeman
(1992 with references).


===== PDF PAGE 277 =====
5.2 AIOLIC 267
PIE ∗ǵʰésr- ‘hand’ (Hitt. kissar, Toch. B ṣar, Arm jeṙn) > ∗χεhρ- > Att., etc. χε̄́ ρ
but Lesb. nom. pl. χέρρες;
pre-Gk ∗ναhϝ´ος  ‘temple’ (cf. Hom. ναίε¯ν  ‘to dwell’) > Dor. νᾱϝ´ος,  Hom. νη´ος,
Att. νε ως´  but Lesb. να˜υος  (= νάϝϝος);
pre-Gk aor. ∗κριν-h- ‘judge’ > Att., etc. 3sg. ἔκρῑνε but Lesb. ἐπέκριννε ‘decided’
(DGE 621.28);
pre-Gk aor. ∗μεν-h- ‘stay’ > Att., etc. 3sg. ἔμε¯νε but Thess. ptc. gen. pl.
συμμεννάντουν ‘so long as they remain’ (DGE 590.15);
PIE ∗méh₁n̥ s- ‘moon’ (Skt mā́ s, Lat. mēnsis ‘month’) > ∗μηνh- ‘month’, gen.
sg.∗ μηνh´ος  > Att., etc. μην´ος  but Lesb. μῆννος, Thess. μεινν´ος;
pre-Gk aor. ∗ἀϝερ-h- ‘lift’ > Hom. inf. ἀε˜ραι but Lesb. ptc. fem. συναέρραισα
(Sappho 81.5);
pre-Gk aor. ∗στελ-h- ‘send’ > Att., etc. 3sg. ἔστε¯λε but Lesb. 3pl. ἀπέστελλαν
(DGE 623.22), Thess. ptc. gen. sg. ἀπυστέλλαντος;
PIE ∗h₂áwsōs ‘dawn’ → ∗h₂usṓs (Skt uṣā  ́s) > ∗ἀϝh ´ως  > Dor. α ̄̔ ϝ ´ως,  Hom. ἠ ´ως,
Att. ἕως but Lesb. αὔως (= ἄϝϝως);
pre-Gk pres. ∗κριν-jε/ο- ‘judge’ > Att., etc., κρῑ́νε¯ν but Lesb. passive ptc.
κρινν´ομεναι (Alkaios 130B.17), Thess. inf. κρεννέμεν (DGE 590.14);
pre-Gk pres. ∗ἀϝερ-jε/ο- ‘lift’ > Hom. ptc. ἀε̄́ ρων but Lesb. iptv. 2sg. κὰδ δ’ ἄερρε
‘take down’ (Alkaios 346.2);
pre-Gk pres. ∗hῑμερ-jε/ο- ‘long for, desire’ > Hom. inf. ῑ̔ με̄́ ρε¯ν but Lesb. inf.
ῑ̓ μέρρην (Alkaios 73.5).
Similar Lesbian forms are quoted by the grammarians (see Buck, loc. cit., and Leje-
une, locc. citt.). The question is how the PGk consonant clusters developed into the
forms with geminate sonorants on the one hand and the forms with the 1CL on
the other.
The standard suggestion is that these consonant clusters developed indepen-
dently in Lesbian and Thessalian on the one hand and in the remaining dialects
on the other; that is:
∗VRh, ∗VhR, ∗VRj (1) > VRR in Lesbian and Thessalian by assimilation, but
(2) > VR in other dialects by the 1CL.
For ∗VhR sequences, in which the lost consonant was originally adjacent to the
vowel that was eventually lengthened, that is obviously plausible. For the other
sequences, in which the lost consonant was not adjacent to the vowel, this scenario
is at least possible; as I will show in 7.2.2, in the ‘third compensatory length-
ening’ we are forced to posit a direct change ∗VCw > VC with no intermediate
stages, and the 1CL could perhaps have been a similar change. This scenario
posits two potential clades of dialects, each of which shares a distinctive sound
change.


===== PDF PAGE 278 =====
268 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
But Cowgill (1969) pointed out that this is not the only possibility. His proposed
scenario can be schematized as follows:
1) ∗VRj > ∗VRʲRʲ, while ∗VhR and ∗VRh > VRR;
2) palatalized geminate sonorants are depalatalized,³ leading to the situation
in Lesbian and Thessalian;
3) finally, ∗VRR > VR in all dialects except Lesbian and Thessalian.
Of course this will work only if there are no counterexamples to change (3), but in
fact there are not: except for the reflex of ∗lʲlʲ, which remained geminate in most
dialects (see 3.6.3), all attested geminates in dialects other than Lesbian and Thes-
salian are of later origin (see below). If Cowgill’s scenario is correct, Lesbian and
Thessalian do not form a clade; they simply failed to share a change shared by all
the other dialects (Parker 2008: 450–5).
Either of the scenarios just presented could be correct; while Cowgill’s is slightly
more complex in terms of the number of changes involved, it is also slightly more
likely in phonetic terms, so that Occam’s Razor cannot really be invoked. We
should look for further evidence that might favor one alternative or the other.
In fact we have already seen evidence favoring Cowgill’s alternative in 3.6.3. It is
beyond dispute that ∗lj became geminate ∗lʲlʲ, which was subsequently depalatal-
ized; the only difference is that the resulting λλ did not undergo the 1CL. We have
also seen that the change from ∗ ny, ∗ ry, ∗wy to ιν, ιρ, ιϝ when α or o preceded is most
plausibly modeled not as a brute-force metathesis but with an intermediate stage
of palatalized geminates. But if ∗Ry-clusters developed into palatalized geminates
in those cases, it is most economical to suppose that they did so in all other cases
too; that is the simplest and most likely sound change that we can posit. It then fol-
lows that the persistence of gemination in Lesbian and Thessalian is conservative,
not evolved—and that the 1CL operated on geminate ∗ nʲnʲ and ∗ rʲrʲ after high and
front vowels (though not on ∗ wʲwʲ—see further below). Once we have arrived at
that conclusion, generalizing to include the rest of Cowgill’s scenario—i.e. ∗VRh,
∗VhR > VRR > VR—seems to be the simplest and most plausible hypothesis that we
can construct. I therefore concur with Scarborough (2016: 114–15), who judges
gemination followed by lengthening to be the most likely hypothesis (on partly
different grounds).
I also suggest that the geminate sonorant stage of development had been reached
in PGk, but depalatalization had not occurred, since ∗lj did not undergo the 1CL
anywhere.
There are a handful of Attic and Ionic examples in which the outcomes of these
clusters are spelled -ειρ- and -ειν- at unexpectedly early dates; for the forms and
discussion, see Kostopoulos (2023: 127–36). Kostopoulos argues (pp. 136–8) that
³ Except in the cases noted in 3.6.3; see further below.


===== PDF PAGE 279 =====
5.2 AIOLIC 269
these forms might actually contain the diphthong ει; if that is true, there might have
been a few localities in the (very large) Attic-Ionic dialect area in which ∗ery and
∗eny developed differently, and the entire development of these sequences might
have been later than is usually supposed.
This is the most convenient place to address the development of ∗ewj. There is
at least a bit of evidence that ∗wj > ∗jw after ∗a and ∗o (see 3.6.3); what happened
after ∗i, e.g. in Hom. δῖος ‘godlike’ < ∗diwyós (cf. Myc. di-u-jo ~ di-wi-jo) is diffi-
cult to determine, since more than one line of development could have yielded ῑ,
and whether ∗ūj was treated as ∗uwy is also difficult to determine.⁴ We have more
potential evidence for what happened to ∗ewy, but the inconclusive discussion of
Lejeune (1972: 171–3) gives a good idea of the problems involved. For instance,
it seems clear from Myc. me-u-jo ~ me-wi-jo ‘less’ and di-u-jo ~ di-wi-jo that ∗wj
remained unaltered in the Mycenaean period; but then why is ‘priestess’ always
spelled i-je-re-ja? The obvious conclusion is that the latter was not derived from
a noun in -ήϝ- (so Lejeune 1972: 172 ad fin.), but if so, we might have fewer 1st-
millennium examples of ∗-ewj- than we had supposed. Two formations at least
seem certain, namely present stems derived from nouns in -ήϝ- and feminines of
adjectives in -ύ- ~ -έϝ-. The former end in -ευ-ε/ο- in almost all 1st-millennium
dialects, but in -ει-ε/ο- in Elean (see 4.2.1 (v) for examples); since -ευ-ε/ο- is
attributable to leveling from aorist -ευ-σα-, the Elean examples are good evidence
that the outcome of ∗-ewj- was in fact -ει-, i.e. /-ejj-/. The feminines of υ-stem adjec-
tives present a more complex picture. In Attic they uniformly end in -ει-α before
the 4th century BC (Threatte 1996: 303–4), by which point /ei/ had merged with
/e:/ and become subject to shortening; that corroborates the inference from Elean
present stems. In Homer about 85% also end in -ει-α, and most of the examples
of -ε-α are scattered enough that formulaic modification and metrical exigencies
seem likely to explain them. But the formula ὠκέα Ἶρις occurs some twenty times,
always in the Iliad, and is clearly an integral part of the poetic tradition. The fact
that these feminines appear uniformly with -ε-α in our text of Herodotos might
suggest that they are not artificial, and that the suffix in at least some Ionic dialects
was actually /-ẽ:a/, with early shortening to /-éa/ (see 6.2), rather than /-éjja/. How-
ever, even the old collection of data in Smyth (1894: 197–9) argues caution: it turns
out that the Ionic lyric poets avoid -ε-α, and the pattern of attestation is consistent
with relatively late development of an earlier diphthongal form. In the poetry of
Sappho and Alkaios the feminines of five different u-stem adjectives occur, and
every one ends in -ηα—neither ‘-ευα’, as might be expected in an Aiolic dialect,
⁴ The obvious example is φʋ ̄́ε¯ν. A 3sg. φυίει is sometimes supplied in Alkaios 10B.5 on the basis of a
scholion to Sophokles Oidipous Tyrannos 153, but the reading of the scholion is apparently not secure.
(I am grateful to Matthew Scarborough for helpful discussion of this point.) The paradigm of ὑιύς ‘son’,
even if we were sure of the original shape of the stem, must have been so vulnerable to leveling that it
is not useful for historical phonology.


===== PDF PAGE 280 =====
270 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
nor -εια. The most likely hypothesis is that ει > η before vowels, or at least non-
high back vowels, in the dialect of the Lesbian poets (though not necessarily in
all subdialects of Lesbian; see the comprehensive discussion of Forssman 1975). I
infer, with caution, that ∗εϝj > /ejj/ in all Ancient Greek dialects (so far as we have
evidence), though clearly after the Mycenaean period, with divergent development
subsequently.
This is also the most convenient place to call attention to some further exam-
ples of Lesbian and Thessalian VRR corresponding to the VR of other dialects that
might reflect pre-PGk consonant clusters of other kinds. One is a common noun
with an obscure suffix:
PGk ∗στάλλᾱ ‘standing stone’ > Lesb., Thess. στάλλᾱ, otherwise στᾱ́ λᾱ (> Att.-
Ion. στήλη).
The preform was probably ∗στάλνᾱ (Schwyzer 1939: 283–4, Frisk s.v. στήλη); a
suffix ∗-σᾱ is not completely impossible, but ∗-νᾱ is much commoner (see the rel-
evant sections of Buck and Petersen 1949). There are a number of similar nouns,
many with questionable etymologies. There is also a present stem:
PGk ∗ὀφέλνεhεν ‘to owe’ > Hom. (Aiolic) ὀφέλλε¯ν, Att.-Ion. ὀφε̄́ λε¯ν, Dor.
ὀφέ̄ λε¯ν (Frisk s.v. ὀφείλω with references).
Whatever the etymology of this root, it is most likely to have had a present in -νε/ο-
like τάμνε¯ν, etc. (see 4.2.1 (ii)). Finally, there is an extraordinarily complex family
of words well attested in most Greek dialects. One member is an inherited noun:
PGk ∗γʷολνᾱ́ (∗γʷολhα?) ̄́ ‘decision, consultation (etc.)’ > Lesb. β´ολλᾱ,  Boiot.,
Ark., etc. βωλᾱ́ , Att.-Ion. βōλή.
This seems to have been derived from a simple thematic present with attestations
scattered across the South Greek dialect group:
Hom. β´ολεται  ‘wishes, prefers’ Il. 11.319, ἐβ´ολοντο  Od. 1.234, β´ολεσθε 16.387
(beside forms of βṓλεσθαι more than thirty times in the two poems
together), West Ionic subj. β´οληται DGE 808.32, 811.31 (both 4th century, o
necessarily short), Arkadian subj. β´ολητοι DGE 657.46, etc. (the 1CL yields
ω in Arkadian, cf. βωλᾱ́ immediately above and see 7.2.4).
But the o-grade root is unexpected in the verb, and the formation of the noun is
also surprising; one might expect the noun to have been ‘∗γʷολᾱ́ ’, a garden-variety
oxytone fem., derived from a root ∗γʷeλ-. In fact e-grade forms of the verb stem
are well attested:


===== PDF PAGE 281 =====
5.3 SOUTH GREEK 271
subj. 3sg. Thess. βέλλειτει DGE 590.20, Boiot. βείλειτη DGE 485.2, Delphian
and Lokrian δείληται (ει = ε¯) DGE 335.10, 366.A.12, Coan δήληται DGE
254.17, 3pl., Heraklean δήλωνται DGE 62.146, etc.
So far as we can tell, the e-grade present stem is attested in Thessalian, Boiotian,
and all of West Greek, i.e. except in South Greek, Lesbian, and Pamphylian. It must
reflect a preform ∗γʷeλ-νε/ο- or ∗γʷeλ-hε/ο-. If it is the original present, an e-grade
desiderative in ∗-hε/ο- is actually likely, given the meaning of the verb (Chantraine
1973: 311). In that case we might consider positing a PGk present ∗γʷeλ-hε/ο-
and derived noun ∗γʷολᾱ́ , with the opaque suffix of the present spreading into
the noun by lexical analogy, at first outside of South Greek, while conversely the
South Greek present was remodeled as ∗γʷολ-ε/ο-, with further lexical analogies
to follow. It does not seem possible to move beyond these speculations, which of
course must remain uncertain; for further discussion see Ringe (2018: 280–2) with
further references.
Examples of geminate νν outside of Lesbian and Thessalian are all obviously
later creations. The most obvious is Πελοπ´οννησος < Πέλοπος νῆσος, but it is
almost as clear that presents such as Att. κρεμαννύναι ‘to be hanging (something)
up’ can have been remodeled on the corresponding aorists κρεμάσαι, etc., with
a fairly recent ∗-σν- that also became -νν- by a still more recent regular sound
change. Examples of λλ that cannot reflect ∗lj are more of a problem. One is clearly
a late secondary development:
ἀπολλύναι ‘to destroy’ < ∗ἀπ-ολ-νυ-,
which suggests that examples such as βάλλε¯ν ‘to throw’, ἀνατέλλε¯ν ‘to rise’ (of
heavenly bodies), and Hom. περιτελλ´ομενος ‘revolving’ also exhibit λλ < ∗λν—
especially since ∗telh₂- ‘lift’ is known to have had a nasal-infixed present and both
∗kʷel- ‘turn’ and ∗ gʷelh₁- ‘throw’ might be expected to (see the relevant entries in
LIV ). But that can only mean that the nasal affix was restored after the 1CL had
run its course (Harðarson 1993: 161 fn. 69). More than that cannot be said unless
and until further information is forthcoming.
5.3 South Greek
In the middle of the 20th century it became clear that Mycenaean, Arkadian,
Cyprian, and Attic-Ionic share several innovations that might lead an observer
to recognize them as a dialect group, sometimes called ‘South Greek’ (Risch 1955:
65–7, 70, Cowgill 1966: 93). Ringe (2018) briefly discusses what seem to me to
be the crucial pieces of evidence; in what follows I will expand somewhat on that
presentation.


===== PDF PAGE 282 =====
272 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
5.3.1 Phonological evidence for South Greek
The most obvious phonological innovation of the South Greek dialects is the
replacement of the sequence τι with σι in a wide range of forms. By itself that
would not necessarily be strong evidence for a clade, even though it must reflect
more than one sound change, because a sequence of changes ∗ti > … > si is
widely attested in other languages across the globe (cf. Ringe and Eska 2013:
257–8). However, the conditioning of this change was partly morphological in
Greek; and since sound change is normally conditioned only by phonological fac-
tors, the shared quirky pattern of this change is good evidence for a South Greek
group, potentially a clade. The best recent discussion is Thompson (2008: 753–8),
on which this discussion partly depends; Méndez Dosuna (1985) is also highly
relevant.
The change affected athematic 3sg. ∗-τι except after -σ- (we find ἐστι in all
dialects):
PGk ∗φᾱτι ‘(s)he says’ (Dor. φᾱτι Alkman 6 fr. 4.4, Bakkhylides 27.36; cf. Skt
bʰāti ‘it shines’) > Myc. pa-si ∗φᾱσι > Att.-Ion. φησι;
PGk ∗εἶτι ‘(s)he is going’ (Kyrenaian εἶτι ‘(nor) shall he go’ Buck 115.57; cf. Skt
éti) > Att.-Ion. εἶσι, Myc. a-pe-i-si ‘is going away’;
PGk ∗δίδωτι ‘(s)he is giving’ (Dor. δίδωτι Simonides 555.1, Boiot. δίδōτι DGE
441; cf. Skt dádāti) > Att.-Ion. δίδωσι;
PGk ∗τίθητι ‘(s)he is putting’ (Delphian τίθητι DGE 332.5–6, Boiot. ἀντίθειτι
(ει = ε¯) DGE 509.6; cf. Skt dádʰāti) > Att.-Ion. τίθησι.
It also affected 3pl. ∗-ντι and ∗-ąτι:
PGk ∗ἄγοντι ‘they lead’ (Koan ἄγοντι DGE 108.23; cf. Skt ájanti ‘they drive’)
> ∗ἄγονσι > Att.-Ion. ἄγōσι;
PGk ∗hέχοντι ‘they have’ (Heraklean ἔχοντι DGE 62.99) > Myc. e-ko-si
∗hέχονσι > Att.-Ion. ἔχōσι;
PGk pf. 3pl. ∗-ąτι (e.g. in Phokian ɩ̄̔ερῑτεύκατι ‘they have held a priesthood’ DGE
353.40–1) > Ark. -ασι (e.g. in ἐσλελοίπασι ‘they have missed’ DGE 657.22).
Though it is more difficult to find entire forms that are exactly cognate, the active
primary 3pl. ending is of course frequently attested; cf. on the one hand, Dor.
ἵσταντι ‘they stand (it)’ Pindar Dithyramb 2.8, Boiot. ἀντίθεντι ‘they dedicate’ (i.e.
manumit) DGE 517.3, Corinthian δίδοντι ‘they (customarily) give’ DGE 128.13,
Megarian νῑκõντι ‘they (habitually) conquer’ DGE 166.1, Theran θῡσέοντι ‘they
shall sacrifice’ DGE 220.2, etc., and on the other hand Ark. εἰκ ἂν κελεύωνσι ‘if
they so order’ DGE 656.15, καθέρπονσι ‘they are returning’ DGE 657.54, Cyprian
e-ke-so-si ∗ἕξο(ν)σι ‘they shall have’ Masson 217.31, Myc. di-do-si ∗δίδονσι ‘they


===== PDF PAGE 283 =====
5.3 SOUTH GREEK 273
give’, do-so-si ∗δ ´ωσονσι ‘they shall give’, ki-ti-je-si ∗κτιjένσι ‘they inhabit’ (cf. Skt
kṣiyánti), etc., as well as every Attic-Ionic active primary 3pl. form.
But note that this change also occurred in Lesbian: we find 3sg. τίθησιν Alka-
ios 58.23, 3pl. πίμπλεισιν Alkaios 72.3, ἐπιρρ´ομβεισι Sappho 31.11–12, φαῖσι
Alkaios 343, pf. 3pl. τεθᾱ́ λαισι Sappho 96.23–3, πεπᾱ́ γαισιν Alkaios 338.2. Nor
are these literary Ionicisms or Homericisms, or errors of transmission; in the
inscriptions we find 3sg. φᾱσι DGE 618.3, 3pl. προτίθεισι DGE 622.13, subj.
γράφωισι DGE 619.3, fut. ἐμμενέοισι DGE 620.29, etc., forms with τ being com-
pletely unknown. In other words, by this criterion Lesbian is a South Greek
dialect.
There seem to be no Pamphylian examples of 3sg. ∗-τι, but at least the sub-
junctive 3pl. form ἐξάγōδι < ∗-ωντι (Brixhe 3.16) shows that that dialect did not
participate in the South Greek change.
Word-final -τι has become -σι in two other South Greek forms:
PGk ∗ϝῑ́ κąτι ‘twenty’ (ϝῑ́κατι in e.g. Lakonian, DGE 13.B.6, Heraklean, DGE
62.37, and Boiotian, DGE 524.1; Thessalian ῎ῑκατι DGE 617g; cf. also Pam-
phylian φῑ́ κατι Brixhe 17.5, 18.5); but >→ εἴκοσι in Attic-Ionic, Arkadian
(DGE 654.1), and Lesbian (DGE 620.21);
PGk ∗πέρυτι ‘last year’ (cf. Skt parút) > Att. πέρυσι; cf. Att. adj. περυσινος´ =
Myc. pe-ru-si-nu-wo.
Once again Lesbian agrees with South Greek. ‘Twenty’ is especially striking
because of the irregularities in the innovative form. The o is probably due to lex-
ical analogy with the higher decads in -κοντα (so e.g. Thompson 2008: 759), and
that might be a repeatable change, given how often numerals influence each other
in IE languages, but the replacement of ∗ϝῑ́ - by εἴ- remains without a convincing
explanation (cf. Thompson 2008: 759–60) and could only have happened once.
Other word-final -τι remain unaffected: ἔτι ‘still, yet’ (cf. Lat. et ‘and’), ἀντί
‘opposite, instead of ’ (cf. Lat. ante ‘before’), and ἄρτι ‘right now’ (cf. Arm. ard)
exhibit no forms with σ in any dialect.
Some word-internal sequences -τι- have also become -σι- in the South Greek
dialects; the best attested is
∗-κą́ τιοι ‘-hundred’ > West Greek -κάτιοι, e.g. in Heraklean fem. διᾱκάτιαι
‘200’ DGE 62.18–19, ϝεξακάτιαι ‘600’ l. 19, etc., Delphian dat. τετρακατίαις
‘400’ DGE 324.2–3, Boiot. acc. ὀκτακατίᾱς ‘800’ DGE 523.17, Thess. masc.
ἑξεικάττιοι ‘600’ SEG 2.264.4;
but > Ark. -κάσιοι, e.g. in masc. acc. τριᾱκάσιος ‘300’ DGE 654.20–1 and
>→ -κ´οσιοι, e.g. in fem. acc. Lesb. τριᾱκοσίαις ‘300’ DGE 622.36, Att.-Ion
τριᾱκοσίᾱς, etc., with o as in εἴκοσι.


===== PDF PAGE 284 =====
274 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
In this case too Lesbian aligns with South Greek, specifically with Attic-Ionic.
Other scattered examples of the same phenomenon include:
Thess. κατίγνειτος ‘brother’ DGE 617g = Hom. κασίγνητος, Lesb. gen. pl.
κασιγνήτων DGE 632.D.19, Cyprian acc. pl. ka-si-ke-ne-to-se Masson 217.3;
Lakonian πλούτιος ‘rich’ (Etymologicon Magnum) = Att.-Ion. πλούσιος, deriv.
of πλο˜υτος ‘wealth’;
Delphian fem. ἐνιαυτίᾱ ‘yearly’ DGE 325.44, Koan neut. pl. ἐνιαύτια DGE
251.37 = Att.-Ion. ἐνιαύσιος, deriv. of ἐνιαυτος´ ‘year’;
Boiot. πλᾱτίος ‘adjoining’ (Holleaux 1897: 26–49), adv. literary Doric πλᾱτίον
‘near’ Theokritos 5.28 = Lesbian πλᾱ́ σιον Sappho 17.1, 31.3, Hom. πλησίος,
Att.-Ion. adv. πλησίον;
West Argolic ῥʋ̄́ τιον ‘penalty’ DGE 83.B.21, East Argolic ἐρρῡτιασμένος ‘plun-
dered’ DGE 104 passim = Ion. ῥʋ̄́ σιον ‘plunder, pledge, penalty’ (Homer and
Attic poets), ῥῡσιάζε¯ν ‘to seize as a pledge’ (Euripides);
Rhodian, Thess. ἐνᾱράτιον DGE 614.10 (and see the notes to DGE 180) = Att.-
Ion. ἐνηρ´οσιον ‘rent for plow-land’.
Those are the secure examples that I am aware of, aside from names and their
derivatives, e.g. West Gk Ἀρταμίτιος = Att.-Ion. Ἀρτεμίσιος (see the discussion
of Buck 1955: 57–8) and the Mycenaean names collected at Thompson (2008:
754–5). Several South Greek forms show that the non-final sequence -θι- also
became -σι-, at least under some circumstances:
Myc. du. e-pi-ko-ru-si-jo ∗ἐπικορυσίω, pl. o-pi-ko-ru-si-ja ∗ὀπικορύσια ‘for
attachment to helmets’, cf. Hom. κ´ορυς,  κ´ορυθ- ‘helmet’;
Att. Προβαλῑ́σιος ‘of Προβάλινθος’ (a deme in the plain of Marathon, see e.g.
Talbert et al. 2000: map 59);
Myc. nom. pl. ko-ri-si-jo ∗Kορίνσιjοι ‘of Corinth’;
Myc. za-ku-si-jo ∗Ζακύνσιος ‘of Zakynthos’.
In later Greek the last two have of course been replaced by Kορίνθιος, Ζακύνθιος,
re-derived from K´ορινθος, Ζάκυνθος—and that illustrates neatly the difficulty of
determining the original scope of this sound change. Especially puzzling is the
fact that nouns derived with the PIE suffix ∗-ti- usually appear with -σι- in all
dialects except when -σ- precedes (thus βάσις, στάσις, γένεσις, etc.; but πίστις,
etc.), so far as we can tell, with a few lexical exceptions (such as poetic φάτις, cited
above, and μῆτις, cited in 4.3.3), and derivatives in -σίᾱ are likewise not restricted
to South Greek; Méndez Dosuna (1985: 118–22) shows that they are so pervasive
that dialect borrowing is not a realistic hypothesis. Some version of the hypothesis
suggested by Thompson (2008: 757), that assibilation was a sound change arrested
at the variable stage as it worked its way through the dialect continuum, must be


===== PDF PAGE 285 =====
5.3 SOUTH GREEK 275
correct. However, when there is a dialect difference, Lesbian groups with South
Greek, so far as our evidence goes.
But Lesbian does not participate in the other clear phonological innovation
of the South Greek group. We saw (in 3.6.3) that when there was no morpheme
boundary between ∗t or ∗tʰ and ∗y the consonant cluster developed aberrantly in
Attic-Ionic and Arkadian (and presumably Cypriote and Mycenaean). Examples
are few but consistent:
PIE ∗médʰyos ‘middle’ (Skt mádʰyas, Lat. medius) > ∗μέθjος > Att.-Ion., Ark.
μέσος but Lesb., Heraklean, Argolic μέσσος, Boiot., Cret. μέττος; cf. Myc.
me-sa-to ‘of middling quality’;
PIE ∗kʷóti ‘how many?’ (Skt káti, Lat. quot), ∗tóti ‘that many’ (Lat. tot), ∗Hyóti
‘as many as’, thematized as ∗κʷοτjος,´  ∗τ´οτjος,  ∗h´οτjος  > Att.-Ion. π´οσος,
τ´οσος, ὅσος, Ark. ὅσος, Myc. to-so, but Lesb. ὄσσος, Delphian, etc. ὅσσος,
Cret. ὄττος;
PIE ∗próti ‘toward, against’ (Skt práti), deriv. ∗prótyō ‘forward’ > Ion. πρ´οσω
(Att. ∗π´ορσω  > π´ορρω),  to which ὀπίσω ‘backward’ was formed, but Dor.
ὀπίσσω Bakkhylides 13.53, Pindar Nemean IX.32, Lesb. ὐπίσσω Sappho
19.10.
In Homer these words vary between -σ- and -σσ-, whereas words containing
∗t(ʰ)+y (with a morpheme boundary) do not. As I noted in 3.6.3, it is difficult to
figure out what happened in detail. But the fact that Lesbian consistently exhibits
σσ in these words shows that, by this criterion, Lesbian is not part of the South
Greek group. The same pattern of outcomes holds for dental-plus-σ sequences
(see 3.7 ad fin.).
Finally, a few other monosyllables exhibit the same development as Ark.,
Cyprian κάς < ∗κάτj before vowel-initial words:
∗π´οτj,  ∗πρ´οτj  > Ark., Cyprian π´ος,  Att.-Ion.,⁵ Lesb. πρ´ος  (but Thess., Boiot.
ποτί, West Greek mostly ποτί ~ ποί, occasionally προτί and its further
developments);
aor. iptv. 2sg. ∗θέθj ‘put!’, ∗δ´οθj  ‘give’ > Att.-Ion. θές, δ´ος;  from other dialects I
can find only σύνες Pindar Hyporchemata 105.1, which can be a Homeric
form.
In this case Lesbian does group with South Greek, so far as our meager evidence
permits us to judge.
⁵ However, the fact that in Homer πρ´ο typically ‘makes position’ when immediately following a short
vowel, while πρ´ος typically does not, strongly suggests that in an earlier stage of the tradition the latter
was π´ος, part of the ‘Achaian’ stratum of the epic dialect. See Wathelet (1966: 151–4) for discussion.


===== PDF PAGE 286 =====
276 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
5.3.2 Morphological evidence for South Greek
The most important morphological piece of evidence for South Greek, but also
the most difficult to judge, is the distribution of active infinitive endings. The facts
are as follows.
In Attic-Ionic, Arkadian, Cyprian, and Mycenaean the thematic active infinitive
originally ended in ∗-ε-hεν, while the athematic active infinitive ended in -έναι,
which in at least some cases might reflect earlier ∗-hέναι. Examples are numerous:
Myc. e-ke-e ∗hέχεhεν ‘to have’, wo-ze-e ∗ϝ´ορζεhεν ‘to make’, etc. (Bartoněk 2002:
328); no unproblematic athematic examples;
Cyprian e-ke-ne ∗ἔχεν or ∗ἔχε¯ν, Masson 217.10, etc.; to-we-na-i ∗δοϝέναι ‘to
give’ ll. 5, 15, to-e-na-i ∗δοέναι Masson 306.6–7;
Ark. ἰμφαῖνεν ‘to bring to light, to inform’ DGE 656.24, φέρην ‘to bear’ DGE
665.A.17, aor. λαχῆν ‘to get by lot’ l. 3; ἦναι (< ∗ἐhέναι) ‘to be’ DGE 656.10,
DGE 657.9, etc.; aor. ἀνθῆναι ‘to set (it) up’ DGE 658.9, δῶναι‘tο give’ DGE
666.2;
Att.-Ion. ἄγε¯ν, φέρε¯ν, etc., aor. λαχε˜ν, etc.; ε˜̓ ναι, ἰέναι, aor. θε˜ναι, δõναι, pf.
εἰδέναι, etc.⁶
The remodeling of ∗-εhεν to -εν in part of the Arkadian Sprachraum is an innova-
tion, occurring also in West Greek dialects (see below), though it is unclear how
it happened. We are on surer ground with the innovative Attic-Ionic ending -ναι,
e.g. in τιθέναι, διδ´οναι, etc. (pf. τεθνάναι already in Mimnermos 2.10): the ending
of aorists such as στῆναι ‘to stand (something) up’, contracted from ∗στηέναι, was
resegmented and the resulting -ναι affixed to pres. ἱστάναι, etc.
The West Greek situation is equally clear: thematic active infinitives originally
ended in ∗-ε-hεν, while their athematic counterparts ended in -μεν, though the evi-
dence has been complicated by later innovations. Most of the more northwesterly
dialects preserve the original situation:
Lakonian ἔχην DGE 48.29 vs. ἦμεν DGE 44.16, ἀνιστάμεν DGE 54.6;
Elean πάσχην DGE 424.13 vs. ἦμεν DGE 425.21, δ´ομεν ibid.l. 28;
Phokian ἀπέχειν DGE 355.II.27 vs. εἶμεν, I.48, παρίμεν DGE 350.6;
Lokrian φάρειν ‘φέρε¯ν, to be subject to (a tax)’ DGE 362.5 vs. ἐξεῖμεν l. 3,
μὴ ’ποστᾶμεν ‘not to secede’ ibid.l. 11;
Megarian παρέχειν DGE 154.8 vs. εἶμεν DGE 153.14, τῑμᾱθῆμεν DGE 154.9;
Corinthian ἔχειν DGE 138.18, λαβεῖν DGE 147.3 vs. εἶμεν DGE 131.12, δ´ομεν
DGE 128.12, ἀναγραφῆμεν DGE 147.7.
⁶ On later Ionic innovations, especially in West Ionic, see Buck (1955: 123, 125).


===== PDF PAGE 287 =====
5.3 SOUTH GREEK 277
However, some dialects have shortened thematic -ην or -ε¯ν to -εν, possibly on the
model of athematic -μεν:
Delphian ἄγεν DGE 325.21, cf. εἶμεν l. 22, διδ´ομεν DGE 322.2;
Heraklean ἔχεν DGE 62.116, cf. ἦμεν loc. cit., πεφυτευκῆμεν l. 142;
East Argolic φέρεν IG IV.823.60, cf. ἀποδ´ομεν DGE 104.11–12;
Astypalaian ἐσέρπεν DGE 242.1, cf. ἀναθέμεν DGE 244.21.
The shortening is certainly an innovation, because in a few dialects it even affects
∗-ε-εhεν:
West Argolic fut. ἐμμενέν DGE 85.7, cf. ἦμεν DGE 85.11, ἐγδ´ομεν DGE 90.18;
Theran λαμβάνεν DGE 227.B.116, τελέν l. 38, cf. θέμεν ll. 14, 20;
Kyrenaian θ˜υεν Buck 115.5, τεκέν l. 100, σῑγέν l. 136, cf. ἐξίμεν l. 135.
If remodeling on the basis of -μεν is the correct explanation for this peculiarity, its
presence in the Arkadian subdialects of Tegea and Mantineia (see above) must be
due to the influence of neighboring West Argolic. In Rhodian the opposite leveling
has occurred, yielding athematic -μειν:
Rhodian παρέχειν DGE 281.13; athematic ἐξήμειν l. 4, ἐκθέμειν l. 3.
The same leveling occurred in some subdialects of Cretan, yielding -μην, yet short-
ened thematic -εν is also attested in Cretan. Without an investigation of all the
material in greater depth it will not be possible to figure out exactly what happened.
As has long been recognized, Thessalian was not a uniform dialect. In Thes-
saliotis, the western plain, we apparently find the same system as in West Greek
(though see the footnotes to the following forms):
thematic ἐξξανακάδ(δ)ε¯ν DGE 557.8–9,⁷ φεύγε¯ν DGE 561.2,⁸ ἔχειν DGE 567.4;
I can find no athematic examples, but Phthiotis (to the south) yields εἶμεν
DGE 556.5—which unfortunately could be a Doric koine form.
But in Pelasgiotis, the eastern plain, -μεν has spread to the thematic stems, yielding
-έ-μεν:⁹
thematic κρεννέμεν DGE 590.14, πρᾱσσέμεν l. 17, etc.; athematic ἔμμεν l. 20,
ἐσδ´ομεν ll. 20–1, etc.
⁷ But Colvin (2007: 93) notes that there are clear non-Thessalian forms in this inscription; in
particular, χρε ̄́μασιν in place of expected χρε¯μάτεσσι can only be Attic or Ionic.
⁸ But (as Matthew Scarborough reminds me) this is a verse epigram which might contain epic forms.
⁹ The appearance of this ending in Homer, like the presence of προτί and some other details, suggests
that the ‘Aiolic’ element in Homer might be specifically Thessalian.


===== PDF PAGE 288 =====
278 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
Boiotian exhibits the same innovation, e.g.:
thematic ὑπαρχέμεν DGE 450.13; athematic εἶμεν DGE 523.11, ἀποδ´ομεν l. 12,
etc.
Since all other dialects have thematic active infinitives reflecting ∗-ε-hεν, directly
or indirectly, this is obviously an innovation, probably a historically shared
innovation (one way or another).
The infinitives of Lesbian present a unique pattern. The thematic infinitive ends
in -ην < ∗-ε-hεν, e.g. in κ´οπτην ‘to coin (money)’ DGE 619.19, πάθην ‘to suffer
(punishment)’ l. 17. Athematic -μεναι is found on monosyllabic stems:
ἔμμεναι ‘to be’ (frequent), κατθέμεναι DGE 619.17, ἀπυδ´ομεναι 621.45,
ἐπιδ´ομεναι  623.42, δ´ομεναι  631.12, etc.
Otherwise the thematic ending has spread to athematic stems too, typically
appearing as vowel length plus -ν:
ἐπιμελήθην DGE 623.46, δίδων 630.15, προνοήθην 631.7, ὄμνῡν 632.C.
10–11, etc.
Occasionally one finds the same ending on monosyllabic stems, e.g. in πρ´οστᾱν
DGE 623.43. It seems clear that -μεναι was originally the active infinitive ending
for all athematic stems, considering its distribution in the Homeric poems (e.g.
ἔδμεναι Il. 4.345 etc., ζευγνύμεναι 3.260, δαήμεναι 6.150 etc.; see Bechtel 1921: 98,
Chantraine 1973: 485–8).
There is one further surprise. Though Pamphylian did not participate in the
South Greek change of ∗-τι to -σι, as we have seen (5.3.1), it does have South Greek
infinitives, to judge from athematic ἀφιιέναι Brixhe 3.6 (so Brixhe 1976: 123–4).
From this welter of facts one clear conclusion emerges: PGk thematic infini-
tives ended in ∗-ε-hεν; on that all the dialects agree except Pelasgiote Thessalian
and Boiotian, and an obvious analogical source for their -έμεν is their athe-
matic -μεν. We need to account for the origin of the athematic endings -μεν,
-μεναι, and -έναι. If we are willing to posit two athematic active infinitive
endings for Proto-Greek, distributed according to some principle no longer
recoverable, several solutions are possible; in particular, Lesbian (and Home-
ric) -μεναι could be a kind of compromise form between the others, no doubt
motivated by dialect contact. But that is not the most parsimonious solution
available; consequently it is neither the most probable nor the best solution
available, absent further evidence. The best solution, other things being equal,
is to account for -μ- and -αι by positing a single preform, which can only
be -μεναι.


===== PDF PAGE 289 =====
5.3 SOUTH GREEK 279
If that is true, -μεναι is a further Lesbian archaism. Thessalian, Boiotian, and
West Greek have remodeled ∗-μεναι to -μεν under the influence of the thematic
ending; that is especially plausible because West Ionic independently remodeled
-ναι to -ν much later (Buck 1955: 123). South Greek, on the other hand, remodeled
∗-μεναι to -(∗h)έναι, also under the influence of the thematic ending. A further rea-
son to believe this scenario is that -μεναι and ∗-hεν are the only two Greek infinitive
endings that might have approximate cognates in Vedic. Lesbian/Homeric -μεναι
appears to be cognate with Vedic -máne (Bechtel 1921: 98, cf. Macdonell 1910:
410), and in fact Hom. ἴδμεναι ‘to know’ is more or less identical with Vedic
vidmáne; the endings might not be exactly cognate—the Vedic forms are syn-
chronically datives, while the Greek ending looks like a fossilized allative—but
the stem formation is. Greek ∗-hεν, on the other hand, is patently cognate with
Vedic locative infinitive -ṣáṇi (Macdonell 1910: 412), the only difference being the
presence or absence of the hic-et-nunc particle ∗-i.
A further consequence of this argument is that, to judge from infinitive end-
ings, Pamphylian is a marginal member of South Greek—just as Lesbian is on
phonological grounds (see 5.3.1).
Other morphological evidence for South Greek is indecisive. The active 1pl.
ending is -μεν in Attic-Ionic and Lesbian (to judge from the Lesbian poets) and
-μες in West Greek, but examples from other dialects are rare. One Arkadian form
ἐδικάσαμε[(IG V-2.262.18, DGE 661.18) is too badly damaged for certainty (see
Buck 1925: 137, Ringe 2016: 280 with references), though Dubois (1986c: 104)
reads ἐδικάσαμεv. The other is unambiguously ὠμ´οσαμες (Te Riele 1967: 212 l.
16). Dubois (1986b: 177–8) suggests that both could be native, since Proto-Greek
must have had both endings and different subdialects of Arkadian might have
generalized differently; but it is also true that one or the other, or even both,
could reflect Attic koine and/or Doric koine influence. All Boiotian and Thes-
salian forms are late (Scarborough 2016: 104–5) and can be suspected of Attic
koine influence to varying degrees, though it is at least worth noting that all end
in -μεν, not in -μες.
South Greek does have a distinctive form of the conjunction ‘when’, namely
Att.-Ion., Ark. ὅτε, Cyprian, Myc. o-te, vs. Lesbian ὄτα, Boiot., West Greek ὅκα;
but since in Attic-Ionic we also find ἔπειτα ‘thereupon’, with the same suffix as in
Lesbian, it seems clear that the dialects have made different choices from among
inherited alternatives, and it is difficult to judge the cladistic relevance of that fact.
The pattern of variants of the conjunction ‘if ’ is even harder to judge. Outside of
South Greek the form is universally αἰ (> Boiot. ἠ by regular sound change), but
South Greek exhibits two forms. In Arkadian we find only εἰ, in Cyprian only ἠ;
Attic-Ionic exhibits εἰ when the conjunction is not contracted with the conditional
particle, but when that contraction does occur we find ∗ἠάν > Att. ἐᾱ́ ν, Ion. ἤν. In
this case too we cannot say for sure which dialects have innovated. In the case of the
irrealis particle all the dialects have innovated by losing inherited alternatives. The


===== PDF PAGE 290 =====
280 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
particle seems originally to have been ∗kém ~ ∗km ̥(Vedic Skt kám), with sound-
change outcomes κεν ~ κα ~ ∗καν in Proto-Greek (Forbes 1958c); the last was
‘recut’ to give ἄν in Attic-Ionic and Arkadian, though Ark. εἰκ ἄν shows that the
particle originally had an initial κ-. In West Greek and Boiotian we find κα; in the
other dialects, including Cyprian, κε(ν).¹⁰
There is also the distribution of forms of the definite article. In NIE the nom.
sg. masc. and fem. were ∗só and ∗sáh₂ respectively, while all other forms began
with ∗t-; in particular, the nom. pl. masc. and fem. were ∗tóy and ∗táh₂as respec-
tively (cf. Skt sá, sa , té, ta s, and Goth. sa, so, þai, þos). West Greek (except Cretan),
Boiotian, and Thessaliote Thessalian preserve the original distribution of initial
consonants, so that the forms are typically ὁ, α , τοί (> Boiot. τʋ   ταί (> Boiot.
τή). But in the whole South Greek group, as well as in Lesbian, Pelasgiote Thes-
salian, and Cretan Doric, the initial of the masc. and fem. nom. sg. forms has spread
to the corresponding plurals, giving οἱ and αἱ (or, in psilotic dialects, οἰ and αἰ).
This could be a South Greek characteristic which has spread more widely than
usual beyond that dialect group, i.e. not only to Lesbian but also to eastern Thes-
salian; but the fact that the same peculiarity occurs in Cretan argues caution. There
it could be taken as a South Greek substrate phenomenon, and the fact that we
also find Ἄρτεμις instead of the usual West Greek Ἄρταμις in Cretan might lend
credence to that interpretation (cf. Buck 1955: 8, 169). But independent parallel
innovation is difficult to exclude, and that fact casts doubt on the usefulness of
this innovation as a marker of South Greek.
Finally, there is the vexed problem of ἱερος´ ‘holy, sacred’. The familiar form of
the word is confined to Mycenaean, Arkadian, Cyprian, and Attic-Ionic, i.e. to
South Greek in the strictest sense; we find ἱαρος´ in West Greek, Boiotian, and
Pamphylian, while the Lesbian form is ἶρος (Buck 1955: 24). The distribution of
forms suggests fairly strongly that South Greek and Lesbian have each innovated,
though of course we cannot be sure, especially given the uncertain etymology of
the word (see Frisk s.v.).¹¹
5.3.3 An assessment of South Greek
From the above discussion it seems clear that South Greek, like Aiolic, can-
not be shown to be a strict clade; on the contrary, the fact that Lesbian shares
only one of the South Greek innovations while Pamphylian shares only another
¹⁰ For an alternative (and very different) reconstruction of the prehistory of this particle, see Colvin
(2016).
¹¹ The proposed connection with Skt iṣirás ‘rushing, active’ rests on an interpretation of Indo-
European polytheism that might best be described as Wagnerian. The pattern of derivatives in -εύς
in Mycenaean, which of course include i-je-re-u = ἱερεύς, suggests that the adjective was a loanword in
Greek (see Meissner 2016: 27–8).


===== PDF PAGE 291 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 281
(so far as we can tell) strongly suggests that the innovations spread across dialect
boundaries. However, again like the Aiolic dialects, the South Greek dialects
clearly share linguistic history in some sense.
5.4 Other widely shared early innovations
Ancient Greek dialects share numerous innovations in distributions that do not
coincide with the limits of dialect groups outlined above. Many of them were com-
paratively recent (from the perspective of the 8th century BC), but others appear
to have occurred, or could have occurred, several centuries earlier. Though it is
difficult to date any particular innovation, it is convenient to sort them roughly
into an earlier and a later group. The (potentially) earlier group will be dealt with
here.
5.4.1 Early phonological innovations
5.4.1 (i) Labiovelars
The most obvious of the early ‘messy’ innovations is the treatment of labiovelars. In
Mycenaean they were still written with a separate set of syllabic signs,¹² but all the
1st-millennium dialects had eliminated them, in two different patterns, broadly
speaking.
The outcome of labiovelars before back vowels and before consonants was the
same in all the 1st-millennium dialects: they became bilabials. That is a nat-
ural change that can have occurred in a single step. The numerous examples
include:
PIE ∗kʷóteros ‘which (of two)?’ (Skt katarás, Goth. ƕaþar) > ποτερος;´
PIE ∗kʷóti ‘how many?’ (Skt káti, Lat. quot) → ∗κʷοτjος´  > Att.-Ion. ποσος;´
PIE ∗kʷát-ye/o- pres. ‘shake’ (Lat. quatere) > πάσσε¯ν, Att. πάττε¯ν ‘to sprinkle’;
PIE ∗kʷrih₂tó ‘(s)he bought’ (cf. Toch. B ka¨ryāmtte ‘we bought’) > Myc. qi-ri-
ja-to, ἐπρίατο;
PIE ∗Hyḗkʷr̥ ~  ∗Hyékʷn- ‘liver’ (Skt yákr̥ t, Lat. iecur with full grade general-
ized) >→ἧπαρ ~ ἥπατ-;
PIE acc. ∗wókʷm̥ ‘voice’ (Toch. B wek) > Hom. acc. ὄπα;
PIE ∗h₃okʷ- ‘eye’ (Toch. B ek, OCS oko) > ὀπ- in ὀφθαλμος,´ dat. pl. Hom.
ὄμμασι, Lesb. ὀππάτεσσι;
PIE coll. ∗h₃ṓkʷ ‘eyes, face’ >→ Hom. acc. ὦπα ‘face’;
¹² Excepting, of course, those that had already been unrounded next to ∗u or before ∗y (see 3.4.3).
Labiovelars were often reintroduced next to ∗u by leveling; see Lejeune (1972: 43–53) for numerous
examples and for comprehensive discussion of the development of labiovelars.


===== PDF PAGE 292 =====
282 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
PIE aor. ∗pḗkʷs- ~ ∗pékʷ-s- ‘cook’ (Lat. pf. coxisse) >→ πέψαι;¹³
PGk ∗ἄνθρωκʷος ‘human being’ (Myc. a-to-ro-qo) > ἄνθρωπος;
PIE ∗ gʷṓws, ∗ gʷów- ‘bovine’ (Skt gáus, gáv-) > Myc. qo-o, qo-u-, βο˜υς, βου- ~
βο(ϝ)-;
PIE pres. ∗ gʷm̥ -yé/ó- and ∗ gʷm̥ -sḱé/ó- ‘step (repeatedly), walk’ (Lat. venīre ‘to
come’, Skt gáccʰati ‘(s)he goes’) > βαίνε¯ν ‘to go’, Hom. also βάσκε¯ν;
PIE ∗é gʷah₂t ‘it is said that (s)he stepped’ (Skt ágāt ‘(s)he has gone’) > ἔβᾱ
‘(s)he went’> Att.-Ion. ἔβη;
PIE ∗ gʷh₂bʰ-ié/ó- ‘be dipping in water’ (ON kvefja) > βάπτε¯ν;
PIE ∗ gʷráh₂u- ~ ∗ gʷr̥ h₂áw- ‘heavy’ (Lat. gravis) → ∗ gʷr̥ h₂ús (Skt gurús, Goth.
kaúrus) > βαρύς;
PIE ∗ gʷl̥h₁tós ‘thrown, throwable’ (cf. Skt udgūrṇas ‘raised, brandished’ with
alternative suffix ∗-nó-) > ∗βλητ´ος  in Hom. ἀπ´οβλητος  ‘disposable, worth-
less’;
PIE ∗ gʷr̥ h₃tós ‘swallowed, swallowable’ (cf. Skt gīrṇás with alternative suffix
∗-nó-) > βρωτος´ ‘edible’;
PIE ∗Hyéh₁gʷah₂ ‘strength’ vel sim. (Lith. jė́ ga) > ἥβᾱ ‘youth’ > Att.-Ion. ἥβη;
PIE ∗néygʷ- ~ ∗nigʷ- ‘wash’ (Skt pres. 3sg. mid. nenikté), pre-Gk aor. ∗νιγʷ-σ- >
νίψαι, cf. also Hom acc. χερνίβα ‘basin’ (‘hand-washer’) and probably Myc.
pl. ke-ni-qa;
(post-)PIE ∗ agʷnós ‘lamb’ (Lat. agnus) > ἀμν´ος;
post-PIE ∗ gʷr̥ dú- ‘slow’ (Lith. gurdùs) > βραδύς;
PGk ∗γʷασιληύς (title of a subordinate ruler, Myc. qa-si-re-u) > βασιλεύς;
PGk ∗φοργʷᾱ́ ‘pasturage’ (Myc. po-qa) > φορβᾱ́ > Att.-Ion. φορβή;
PIE ∗snigʷʰ- ‘snow’ (Lat. nix, niv-) > Hom. acc. νίφα;
PIE ∗sóngʷʰos ‘chanting’ vel sim. (Goth. saggws ‘song’), coll. ∗ songʷʰáh₂ >
∗hονχʷᾱ́ > ὀμφή ‘oracular voice’;
PIE ∗ negʷʰrós ‘kidney’ (cf. Lat. dial. pl. nefrōnēs, OHG nioro) > νεφρ´ος;
PIE ∗h₁ln̥ gʷʰrós ‘light(weight)’ (OHG lungar ‘vigorous’) > ἐλαφρος´ ‘light’;
PIE ∗dʰegʷʰ- ‘burn’ (Skt 3sg. dáhati) > τεφ- in τέφρᾱ ‘ashes’;
PIE ∗ nˊd ̥ʰgʷʰitom (ḱléwos) ‘imperishable (fame)’ (Skt ákṣitaṃ (´srávas)) > Hom.
(κλέος) ἄφθιτον.
(Examples that gave rise to alternations between labials and dentals will be
adduced below, as will examples that might have been expected to give rise to alter-
nations but did not.) It can be seen from the above examples that this sound change
postdated not only the Mycenaean period but also many of the early sound changes
discussed in Chapter 3; on the other hand, it predated the Attic-Ionic fronting of
¹³ Cf. Myc. a-to-po-qo ∗ἀρτοπ´οκwος ‘baker’. The κ of Att. ἀρτοκ´οπος is surprising; if it is not simply
the result of dissimilation (from ∗-π´οπος), the only available explanation seems to be that the second
part of the compound was remodeled on pres. ∗πεκ-jε/ο- (see 3.4.3) and that metathesis then occurred.
Dissimilation seems more likely.


===== PDF PAGE 293 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 283
∗ᾱ (cf. ἔβη, ἥβη, φορβή, ὀμφή). The only clear counterexamples are the East Ionic
derivatives of interrogative ∗kʷo- that exhibit κ instead of the expected π: κοθεν,´
κοῖος, κοσος,´  κοτε,´   κοτερος,´  κου,˜  κῶς, and the corresponding indefinite forms, as
well as κω, all well attested in Herodotos and other authors and at least once in an
inscription (see Bechtel 1924: 87–9 for discussion in depth). So far as I can see,
the only possible explanation is that the labiovelar was delabialized in οὔκω and
οὔκως and κ then spread by lexical analogy, first to the corresponding positives,
then to the other derivatives of this stem.
The dialects exhibit divergent outcomes before mid front vowels: most exhibit
dentals, but labials appear in Lesbian, Thessalian, Boiotian, and Cyprian (!). The
change from labiovelars to dentals could not have occurred in a single step; a
plausible sequence of changes for the voiceless stop might be ∗kʷ > ∗[cɥ] (palatal-
ization) > ∗[ʨ] (affrication and unrounding) > [ʦ] > τ. In those dialects with dental
outcomes there are often related words with labial outcomes before other sounds.
The following are typical:
PIE masc. ∗kʷetwóres ‘four’ (Skt catvā́ ras, Toch. B ´stwer) >→ Lesb. πέσσυρες,
Boiot. πέτταρες, Thess. combining form πετρο- vs. Att. τέτταρες, Ion., Ark.
τέσσερες, West Greek τέτορες, combining form τετρα- (cf. Myc. qe-to-ro-);
PIE ∗pénkʷe ‘five’ (Skt páñca) > Lesb. πέμπε in πεμπεβοηα´ ‘made of five
oxhides’ Sappho 110.2 vs. Att.-Ion., Ark., WGk πέντε ‘five’ —but πέμπτος
‘fifth’;
PIE ∗kʷey- ‘pay’ in Thess. ἀππεισάτου ‘let him pay’ DGE 614.28, Boiot.
ποταποπῑσάτω ‘let her pay in addition’ DGE 523.163, Cypr. pe-i-se-i ‘he
shall pay’ Masson 217.12, 25¹⁴ vs. Ark. ἀπυτεισάτω DGE 656.35, Att.-Ion.,
WGk τεῖσαι —but PIE ∗kʷoynáh₂ ‘recompense’ (Av. kaēnā ‘punishment’,
OCS cěna ‘price’) > Att.-Ion. ποινή ‘weregild, penalty’;
PIE ∗kʷel- ‘turn’ in Lesb. πέλεται ‘is’ Sappho 50.1 (also Homer) vs. Hom. περι-
τελλομένου ‘revolving’ Od. 11.295 —but PIE ∗kʷólos ‘axis’ (Toch. B kele
‘navel’) > πολος;´
PIE ∗kʷels- ‘make a groove’ (Hitt. gulszi ‘(s)he engraves’) in Hom. τέλσον
(ἀρούρης) ‘boundary (of the field)’;
PGk ∗κʷηλ- ‘far’ in Lesb. πήλοι Sappho 1.6 vs. Hom. τῆλε;
PIE ∗ gʷelbʰ- ‘womb’ (Skt gárbʰas) > Att.-Ion. δελφʋ ̄́ς and (probably) West
Greek, Att.-Ion. Δελφοί vs. Boiot. Bελφοί, Thessaliote Bελφαίō DGE 557.10;
PIE ∗ n ̥gʷḗn ‘gland’ (Lat. inguen ‘groin’) > Ion. ἀδήν;
PIE ∗ gʷʰen- ‘hit, kill’ in Hom. pres. θε¯νέμεναι ‘to slay’ —but reduplicated aor.
πεφνέμεν and pf. 3sg. πέφαται ‘he lies slain’;
¹⁴ This is the only example of the labial outcome before an e-vowel in Cyprian, but there are no
counterexamples, and lexical analogy with (e.g.) ποινα ̄́doesn’t strike me as likely, considering how
different the verb and its derived nominals had become.


===== PDF PAGE 294 =====
284 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
PIE pres. ∗ gʷʰédʰ-ye/o- ‘to beg’ (OPers. jadiyāmiy ‘I pray’) > θέσσεσθαι
(Hesych.) —but derived noun π´οθος ‘desire’;
PIE ∗ gʷʰéros ‘heat’ (Skt háras, Arm. ǰer) > Att.-Ion. θέρος ‘summer, harvest’.
To these examples can be added the lexical family of βṓλεσθαι ‘to want’ (see 5.2.2)
and a word of obscure origin:
WGk, Ark. ὀδελος´ ‘spit; obol’ DGE 179.II.14, 654.19, etc., vs. Thess. ὀβελλος´
DGE 614.20, Hom. pl. ὀβελοί —but Att. ὀβολ´ος.
To this usual pattern of development there is one exception: PIE ∗kʷe ‘and’ > τε
in all dialects (possibly except Cyprian, in which the word is unattested, Lejeune
1972: 49). Parker (2013: 220), Scarborough (2016: 71–3), and (for the Thessalian
examples) Garcı´a Ramón (2020: 306, 314–15) note that all the epigraphical exam-
ples in Aiolic dialects are late enough that Attic koine influence cannot be excluded,
with the exception of an early Boiotian inscription in verse in which τε could be
an epicism; and further that the repeated appearance of τε in the poetry of Sappho
and Alkaios could likewise be a Homeric borrowing. That seems to me to be the
most probable solution.
In simple thematic presents and aorists made to roots ending in a labiovelar,
and in neuter s-stems made to such roots, we might expect to find an alternation
between labials and dentals in those dialects in which labiovelars became dentals
before e-vowels, yet we never do; the labial outcomes have been leveled through
every relevant paradigm. The following are typical:
PIE ∗wékʷos, ∗wékʷes- ‘word, speech’ (Skt vácas) >→ ἔπος, ἔπε-;
PIE reduplicated aor. ∗we-wk-e/o- ‘say’ (Skt voca-) → ∗wewkʷe/o- (labiove-
lar restored from other stems) > PGk ∗ϝεικʷε/ο- (dissimilation of ∗wew- to
∗wey-) >→ εἰπε˜ν;
PIE pres. ∗sékʷetor ‘(s)he accompanies’, ∗sékʷontor ‘they accompany’ (Skt
sácate, sácante with remodeled endings; see 2.3.3 (iii)) >→ ἕπεται, ἕπονται
(also with remodeled endings, see further 4.2.6 (iv));
PIE aor. subj. ∗léykʷe/o- ‘leave’ (see 4.2.1 (iv)) >→ pres. λείπε¯ν;
PIE ∗h₁régʷos, ∗h₁régʷes- ‘darkness’ (Skt rájas ‘empty space’, Goth. riqis) >
ἔρεβος, ἐρέβε- ‘passage to the underworld’;
PIE pres. ∗tyégʷe/o- ‘retreat’ (Skt tyája-‘abandon’) >→σέβεσθαι ‘to be
ashamed’;
pre-Gk aor. ∗slagʷé/ó- ‘grab’ (cf. Hom. pres. λάζεσθαι with ζ < ∗gy < ∗ gʷy, see
3.4.3) >→ λαβε˜ν;
(post-)PIE pres. ∗snéygʷʰe/o- ‘be snowing’ (OHG snīwan) >→ νείφε¯ν;
PIE ∗h₂algʷʰ- ‘earn’ (cf. Skt pres. 3sg. árhati ‘(s)he deserves’) in Hom. aor.
ἀλφε˜ν.


===== PDF PAGE 295 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 285
Before ∗i and ∗ī there is yet another pattern of outcomes. In all dialects ∗kʷ was
palatalized in that position, and in most it appears as τ:
PIE ∗kʷ´dı ‘what?’, ∗kʷid ‘something’ (Lat. quid, ali-quid, Skt focus particle cit,
etc.; cf. Myc. jo-qi ‘ὅττι, whatever’) > τί, τι;
post-PIE ∗kʷi-néw- ~ ∗kʷi-nu- ‘pay, repay’ (see 4.2.1 (ii)) > ∗τινευ- ~ ∗τινυ-,
thematized as ∗τινϝε/ο- > Hom. τῑ́νειν, Att. etc., τίνε¯ν (see 7.2.2);
PGk ∗κʷῑμᾱ́ ‘respect, honor’ (if related to Skt nı´ cikāya ‘(s)he perceives’, see LIV
s.v. 1. ∗ku̯ ei̯ ) > τῑμᾱ́ > Att.-Ion. τῑμή.
However, the aspirated labiovelar appears as φ in the only certain example:
PIE ∗h₃ḗgʷʰis ~ ∗h₃ógʷʰi- ‘snake’ (Arm. izˇ, Skt áhis) > ὄφις.
The situation of the voiced labiovelar before front high vowels is less clear. The
usual outcome is β:
PIE ∗ gʷi(H)- ‘bowstring’ (Skt jyā́ , disyllabic at RV VI.75.3) > Hom. βιος´ ‘bow’;
PIE ∗ gʷih₂áh₂- ‘force’ (Skt jyā́ ) > βίᾱ > Ion. βίη;
(post-)PIE ∗ gʷih₃óh₁- /∗ gʷih₃-éh₁-/ ‘be/become alive’ (cf. ∗ gʷih₃wós ‘alive’ >
Skt jīvás, Lat. vīvos) > Hom. βιῶναι ‘to escape alive’.
However, there are also two possible examples of an outcome δ. One is found in
the Heraklean tables:
τα˜υτα  δὲ πάντα πεφυτευμένα παρhεξ´οντι  καὶ ἐνδεδιωκ´οτα, ὅσσα ἐν τᾶι συνθήκᾱι
γεγράψαται they shall present ( for inspection) all the aforesaid ( fully) planted and
the plants settled in (?), however many shall have been written in the agreement.
DGE 62.120–1
It is highly likely that the perfect participle ἐνδεδιωκ´οτα is part of the paradigm of
the Heraklean verb that corresponds to Hom. βιῶναι (see above), and in that case
we have an alternative outcome for the voiced labiovelar before ι. The same is at
least suggested by a comparison of some Mycenaean forms with forms current in
later Greek:
Myc. qe-qi-no-me-no, qe-qi-no-to (mediopassive perfect participle and 3sg. (?)
describing the decoration of furniture; see Aura Jorro 1999 s.vv.), cf. Att.-Ion.
δῑ́ νη ‘whirlpool’, etc.?
If the Mycenaean forms mean ‘(has been) turned (on a lathe)’ or the like, this South
Greek word family would be another example of ∗ gʷ > δ before a high front vowel.


===== PDF PAGE 296 =====
286 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
What are we to make of this complex pattern of outcomes? The following
solution, following Parker (2013: 222–4), seems to me optimal.
It seems clear that the development of labiovelars to bilabials was the default
outcome even where it was not the only outcome; the most economical hypoth-
esis is that that change occurred last, affecting all labiovelars that had not already
been changed into something else (Lejeune 1972: 47, 52, Parker 2008: 446,
2013: 223). Since the earlier changes were not the same in all dialects, the
change to bilabials must have spread through a dialect continuum, to the extent
that it was not an independent change (see below). But even the palataliza-
tion of ∗kʷ (eventually resulting in τ) before high front vowels, which affected
all dialects, must have spread from dialect to dialect because it is demonstra-
bly post-Mycenaean (Parker 2013: 222). The simplest chronology that can be
constructed is:
1) palatalization of ∗kʷ before high front vowels, plausibly the leading edge of
the following change;
2) palatalization of all labiovelars before mid front vowels, not spreading
to Boiotian, Thessalian, Lesbian, and Cyprian because of their relative
isolation; with respect to this change note that
a) it probably occurred after the substantial Greek settlement of Cyprus
upon the collapse of Mycenaean civilization, and
b) both Lesbian and Boiotian are notable for other archaisms;
3) labiovelars > bilabials, possibly partly independently in some dialects, since
such a change is common enough in other languages.
There is documentary evidence that the change of labiovelars to dentals occurred
in more than one stage, since intermediate stages are attested in Arkadian and
Cyprian. Arkadian spellings suggest an affricate: ὄζις ‘ὅστις, whoever’ Buck 16.4,
ὁͷέοι ‘ὅτῳ, in the case of anyone who’ DGE 661.14, εἴ ͷις ‘if anyone’ l. 25,
etc.; Cyprian writes si-se for τις, e.g. at Masson 217.10, but since the syllabary
does not distinguish all the consonant phonemes it is difficult to say what that
means phonetically. There is no reason to believe that Arkadian and Cyprian
did not participate in the palatalization of ∗kʷ before high front vowels at the
same time as the other dialects (roughly speaking); the subsequent changes
to the palatalized labiovelar simply proceeded more slowly than in the other
dialects.
To the change ∗kʷ > τ there is a surprising exception, a velar outcome κ in
Thessalian κις ‘anyone’, e.g. in DGE 614.26. As with the Ionic κ’s, there is a sim-
ple explanation: the velar outcome has been generalized from οὔκις ‘no one’ (pace
Dunnett 1970; see 3.4.3).


===== PDF PAGE 297 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 287
5.4.1 (ii) Syllabic liquids
The only other ‘scattered’ phonological innovation that seems to have been early
is the resolution of the syllabic liquids ∗ r ̥and ∗l;̥ because of the distribution
of inherited phonemes, nearly all the examples involve ∗ r ̥. The comprehensive
discussion of van Beek (2022) is essential for serious students of Greek; as
usual, I will offer a summary of relevant points, sometimes preferring alternative
solutions.
Since the dialect reflexes diverge, it is clear that ∗ r ̥and ∗l ̥still existed as con-
trastive sounds in some form or other in Proto-Greek. How long they survived
is a vexed question. The discussion of van Beek (2022) is very useful, but one of
the hypotheses on which it is based is probably untenable, namely that ∗ r ̥survived
longer in the epic dialect than in spoken Ionic and underwent a separate regular
development to ρα at a later date in epic Greek (van Beek 2022: 237–88). Since
the pronunciation of a native language is acquired in the first few years of life,
and since it is impossible to believe that small children learned the epic dialect
natively, we must imagine some generations of oral poets in training learning to
pronounce consistently a phoneme that was foreign to them. Van Beek’s suggested
scenario for that process (pp. 259–62) is not convincing. But if we cannot posit a
separate chronology for epic Greek, we will not be able to do without the tradi-
tional assumption of metathesis in at least a few words (which van Beek wishes to
exclude).
I begin with a consideration of word-initial and word-final ∗ r ̥. It is true that the
former should have existed in full words only as the zero grade of word-initial
∗Vr-, and the only possible example is Hom. ἄρμενος ‘fitted’: the root cannot have
begun with the second laryngeal, to judge from Hitt. natta āra ‘it’s not right’, and if
it had begun with the first laryngeal the zero grade would have given ἐρ- by Rix’s
Law (see 3.2.2). Unfortunately we cannot be sure that ἄρμενος does not exhibit a
full-grade root. It is possible that Hom. ἄρ ~ ῥα reflects an enclitic particle ∗ r ̥(cf.
Lith. ir˜ ‘and’) in which initial ∗r was permissible in PIE because the clitic was not
a phonological word; either the double form of this particle is a prima facie case
of metathesis or, especially considering its enclitic nature, the double outcome of
∗ r ̥might reflect regular sound changes dependent on the prosody of the preceding
word, along the lines of Hoenigswald (1953: 289–90). However that may be, nearly
all examples of ἀρ- do result from Rix’s Law (van Beek 2022: 16–17) and are of no
further relevance here.
Word-final ∗ r ̥nearly always appears as -αρ, and for that reason and others van
Beek suggests, following much earlier work, that that outcome is the result of a
regular sound change at least in South Greek (van Beek 2022: 18, 416). However,
nearly all examples of ∗ -r ̥> -αρ are neuter r/n-stem nouns with oblique stems in
-ατ- < ∗ -n ̥t- (or, in a few cases, leveled -αρ- < word-internal ∗ -r ̥-), which could


===== PDF PAGE 298 =====
288 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
be the source of their α, as van Beek observes (pp. 417–18). Typical examples
include:
PIE ∗Hyḗkʷr ̥‘liver’ (see 3.2.1) > ἧπαρ;
PIE ∗pérwr ̥‘end of a rope’ (Skt párus, RV X.100.5, and see 4.3.3) > ∗πέρϝαρ >
Hom. πε˜ραρ ‘cord’;
PIE ∗dʰénr ̥‘palm (of the hand)’ (OHG tenar) > θέναρ;
PIE ∗wésr ̥‘spring(time)’ (cf. Av. loc. vaŋri) > Hom. ἔαρ;
PIE ∗ówdʰr ̥, ‘udder’ (cf. Skt ū́ dʰar, Lat. ūber) > οὖθαρ;
post-PIE ∗ a ̄́mr ̥‘day’ (Arm. awr < coll. ∗ a ̄́mōr) > ἆμαρ (cf. pl. ῎ᾱματα πάντα DGE
661.22 (Arkadian), Buck 59.A.12 (Lokrian)) > Hom. ἦμαρ.
That makes the pattern of attestation of Hom. ἦτορ ‘heart’ more than a little inter-
esting. The word is clearly a neuter consonant stem, but it is attested only in the
nom. and acc. sg.—in other words, the potential source of α by leveling has been
lost in the epic tradition, and -ορ could be a regular sound-change outcome of final
∗ -r ̥. Homeric and Cyprian αὐτάρ ‘but’ is not a clinching counterexample, since it
is a compound whose second component can reflect development of initial ∗ r ̥in
an enclitic (see above). It seems we must conclude that while the sound-change
outcome of word-final ∗ -r ̥is -Vρ, the identity of the vowel can have been different
in different dialects, and that Homeric ἦτορ can be attributed to the Akhaian or
Aiolic component of the oral tradition (Aiolic if αὐτάρ is a counterexample after
all; see van Beek 2022: 419).
The Mycenaean evidence is sparse and difficult to interpret. Two examples
appear to show an outcome ορ:
PIE ∗ wr ̥ǵyéti (Av. vərəziieiti) > wo-ze ∗ϝορζει´ ‘(s)he is working (the land)’; inf.
wo-ze-e, ptc. wo-zo, pl. wo-zo-te, mp. wo-zo-me-no;
PGk ∗(κʷ)τρ̥ˊπεδjα ‘four-footer’ > to-pe-za ∗τορπεζα´  ‘table’ (cf. Att.-Ion.
τράπεζα).
Two others seem to show ρο:
PGk ∗κʷετρ̥- ‘four-’ in inst. pl. qe-to-ro-po-pi ∗κʷετροποδφι´  (cf. Hdt. pl.
τετράποδα);
place name ma-to-ro-pu-ro, apparently ∗Mᾱτροπυλος,´ of which the first part is
likely to be ‘mother’; the variant ma-to-pu-ro can be an error.
The 1st-millennium combining form of ‘mother’ shows that a linking vowel -o- is
not completely out of the question, though at an early date that seems less likely.
The final example is damaged:


===== PDF PAGE 299 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 289
PIE loc. pl. ∗dʰugh₂tr̥ sú (cf. Skt duhitū́ ṣu) >→ dat. pl. tu-ka-ṭạ-ṣị θυγατάρσι ‘to
the daughters’?
That is the usual reading of this form (Sacconi 1974: 32), but some specialists (e.g.
Lejeune 1972: 127, 197) read tu-ka-to-si. The signs ta and to are not extremely
similar, but both are rectilinear and vertical, and the tablet is damaged enough to
raise doubts; in addition, a single example could be an error.
It seems clear that the normal outcome of ∗ r̥ in Lesbian, Thessalian, and
Boiotian is ρο (van Beek 2022: 117–29). Clear examples include:
PIE ∗ mr̥ tós ‘mortal’ (Skt mrtás ̥ ‘dead’) > Hom. (Aiol.) βροτ´ος;
PIE ∗ mr̥ ǵʰéw- ‘short’ in Lesb. βρ´οχε(α) ‘briefly’ Sappho 31.7, Thess. Mροχṓ
‘Shorty’ SEG 24.406 (Att.-Ion. βραχύς);
(post-)PIE aor. ∗tr̥ pé- ‘turn’ > Lesb. τρ´οπην ‘to turn’ Alkaios 70.9 (Att.-Ion.
τραπε˜ν);
PGk aor. ∗ἀμρ̥τέ- ‘miss a mark’ in Lesb. ἄμβροτε ‘he made mistakes’ Sappho
5.5, inf. ἀμβ[ρ´ο]την  ‘to break the law’ DGE 619.15–16 (Att.-Ion. ἁμαρτε˜ν);
PGk ∗στρ̥ τ´ος  ‘camp’ in Lesb. acc. στρ´οτον  ‘army’ Sappho 16.1, στρ´οτᾱγοι  ‘gen-
erals’ DGE 620.7, Boiot. ἐσστροτεύαθη ‘they have campaigned’ DGE 521.6
(Att.-Ion. στρατ´ος, etc.).
The clearest example of ορ is ἐμμορμενον´ ‘fated’ at Alkaios 39.7 (Att. ε̄̔ μαρμένον);
it can owe the shape of its root (and might even owe its vowel) to analogy with
active ἔμμορε (four times in Homer). Examples with α-vοcalism can reflect dialect
borrowing.
For Cyprian there is very little evidence that can’t be questioned. ka-te-wo-ro-
ko-ne ∗κατήϝοργον ‘they besieged’ Masson 217.1 is almost certainly a thematic
aorist with zero-grade ∗ r̥ in the root; on a-u-ta-ra-∗αὐτάρ ‘but, however’ Masson
235.2, shared only with epic, see above.
Much of the apparent Arkadian evidence can likewise be impugned (see Mor-
purgo Davies 1968). Possibly the best evidence is fem. gen. τετ´ορτᾱυ ‘of the fourth’
DGE 656g.104 (Att.-Ion. τετάρτης) and dat. πανᾱγ´ορσῑ ‘festival’ DGE 654.26, gen.
τριπανᾱγ´ορσιος l. 8, in which a zero grade of ἀγερ- ‘gather’ is expected. Once
again, examples with α-vοcalism can reflect dialect borrowing. Note that Arka-
dian acc. pl. δαρχμάς (DGE 654.8) can reflect metathesis of ρ and a short vowel;
the root is normally δραχ-, which can reflect either ∗dr̥ ǵʰ- or ∗drn̥ ǵʰ- (LIV s.v.
∗dregʰ).
In Attic-Ionic and the West Greek dialects the outcomes are αρ ~ ρα and αλ ~
λα. We find αρ and αλ before vowels, typically when a laryngeal has been lost, and
before ∗y:


===== PDF PAGE 300 =====
290 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
PIE ∗ wr ̥ḗ(n) ‘lamb’ (Arm. gaṙn, gen. gaṙin) >→ ϝαρήν (preserved in Cretan) >
ἀρήν;
PIE ∗ gʷráh₂u- ~ ∗ gʷr ̥h₂áw- ‘heavy’ >→ ∗ gʷr ̥h₂ús (Skt gurús) > Gk βαρύς;
PIE ∗ǵʰr ̥yé/ó- ‘be pleased with’ vel sim. (Old Lat. horitur ‘(s)he encourages,
urges’) >∗χαρjε/ο- > χαίρε¯ν ‘to rejoice, to be glad’;
pre-PGk ∗iswo-kʰesr ̥-ya ‘arrow-handed (fem.)’ > ∗ἰhϝο-χεhαρ-jα > Hom.
( Ἄρτεμις) ι ̄̓οχέαιρα (Heubeck 1956);
pre-Gk aor. ∗γʷλ̥ h₁-έ/ο-´ ‘throw’ (cf. Skt ptc. udgūrṇas ‘lifted, raised’) > βαλε˜ν.
We find preconsonantal ρα and λα in the roots of u-stem adjectives, apparently
regardless of where the full-grade vowel was:
PIE ∗mréǵʰu- ~ ∗ mr ̥ǵʰéw- ‘short’ (Lat. brevis) → ∗ mr ̥ǵʰús (Av. mərəzu-) >
βραχύς;
PIE ∗dʰérs- ~ ∗dʰr ̥s- ‘dare, be bold’ (pf. 3sg. ∗dʰedʰórse > Skt dadʰárṣa, Goth.
ga-dars) in ∗dʰérsos ‘daring, bravery’ > Lesb. θέρσος, ∗dʰr̥ sús ‘brave, bold’
> θρασύς (the latter with -σ- leveled from the former; the former → Att.-Ion.
θάρσος by leveling on the latter);
PIE ∗krétu- ~ ∗kr ̥téw- ‘strong’ (substantivized in Skt krátus ‘power’) >→ κρατύς;
post-PIE ∗ gʷr̥ dú- ‘slow’ (Lith. gurdùs) > βραδύς;
PIE ∗pláth u- ~₂ ∗plth áw- ‘broad’̥₂ (Lith. platùs) → ∗plth ús̥₂ (Skt pr ̥tʰús) >
πλατύς.
In verb paradigms we find αρ before nasal suffixes:
PIE ∗ mr̥ -n-h₂- ‘crush’ vel sim. (Skt iptv. mr̥ ṇīhı´) > Hom. mid. μάρνασθαι ‘to
fight’;
PIE ∗pstr̥ -néw- ~ ∗pstr̥ -nu- ‘sneeze’ (Lat. sternuere) > πτάρνυσθαι.
Otherwise the pattern is not clear. We often find αρ ablauting with ερ and ρα
ablauting with ρε, strongly suggesting that paradigmatic leveling is in question:
PIE ∗térp- ~ ∗tr ̥p- ‘have enough of ’ (Skt nt. ptc. as adv. tr ̥pát ‘to satiety’) →
∗τρ̥πέ/ο- ´ > Hom. subj. ταρπωμεθα ´ ‘we are refreshed’;
PIE ∗smer- ‘to receive a portion’ (Lat. merērī ‘to deserve’) > με ̄́ρεσθαι; ∗ se-smr ̥-
> ∗hε-hμαρ- > ἑ̄́ μαρται ‘it is fated’;
pre-Greek ∗h₂mert- ‘miss (a mark)’ (cf. Hom. νημερτής) in aor. ἁμαρτε˜ν ‘to
miss, to err’ (apparently /h-/ by lexical analogy);
PIE ∗tres- ‘be afraid’ (pres. τρε˜ν, Skt 3sg. trásati), zero-grade ∗tr ̥s- in adj. ∗tr ̥s-
ró-‘afraid’ > ∗τραhρο- in pre-Att.-Ion. ∗τράhρων ‘timid’ > Hom. τρήρων.
Note that in the last example the development to ρα must have preceded the first
compensatory lengthening.


===== PDF PAGE 301 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 291
But we also find ρα in the zero grades of roots that contained ∗er:
PIE ∗gérbʰ- ~ ∗ gr̥ bʰ- ‘cut (into)’ (cf. OE ċeorfan ‘to cut’, with full grade the-
matized) >→ Gk ∗γραφέ/ο-´ > γράφε¯ν Hom. ‘to scratch, to graze (with a
weapon), to engrave’, later ‘to write’;
PIE ∗dérḱ- ~ ∗dr̥ ḱ- ‘look at’ (Skt 3pl. ádr̥ ´sran) → ∗dr̥ ḱé/ó- > Hom. δρακε˜ν ‘to
look (at)’.
The latter example is noteworthy because the full grades actually survive in
Greek: Hom. pres. δέρκεσθαι, pf. 3sg. δέδορκε. There is also an example with λα
reflecting a root for which evidence for the full grade is scanty (cf. LIV s.v. ∗selǵ):
PIE zero grade ∗sl̥ǵ- ‘let go’ (Skt pres. 3sg. sr̥ játi) > ∗hlag- in Cret. aor. λαγάσαι,
DGE179.I.5.
Finally, there are a few notorious examples in which both outcomes are attested,
e.g.:
PIE zero-grade ∗ḱr̥ d- ‘heart’ (Hitt. kart-, Lat. cord-) in Hom. κραδίη, Ion. καρδίη
(e.g. Arkhilokhos 94.3, 114.4, Herodotos 3.35 (twice)), Att. καρδίᾱ;
Hom. κρατερος´ ~ καρτερος´ ‘strong, etc.’;
βραδύς (see above) but βάρδιστοι Il. 23.310, 530.
It seems unlikely that the nom. acc. sg. κῆρ ‘heart’ survived long enough to influ-
ence the vocalism of the post-Homeric forms, and I find speculation about the
exact meaning and etymology of κρατερος´ ~ καρτερ´ος (van Beek 2022: 189–236)
unprofitable; the most probable hypotheses are that the range of meaning of the
latter word was broad and that sporadic metathesis was real.
However, van Beek deserves great credit for tackling a problem that will not
go away, namely the anomalous scansion of certain sequences in Homer. Hugo
Mu¨hlestein noted that ἀνδροτῆτα (Il. 16.857, 22.363, 24.6) has to be scanned with
a light first syllable, and that there is a similar problem with ἀνδρεϊφ´οντης (altered
from ∗ἀνδρο-), νὺξ ἀβρ´οτη  (Il. 14.78), ἀμφιβρ´οτη,  and μή πως ἀβροτάξομεν
ἀλλήλοιϊν ‘in case we might miss one another’ (Il. 10.65; Mu¨hlestein 1958: 224 fn.
20, 226 Nachtrag). Wathelet (1966) investigated other cases in which muta-cum-
liquida fails to ‘make position’ in Homer, and after eliminating several classes of
examples he listed those in which he believed ρV and λV could reasonably reflect ∗ r̥
and ∗l̥: τραπέσθαι, τράπεζα, δράκων and the related aorist δρακε˜ν, θρ´ονος, βροτος´
and its derivatives, κράνεια, κράτος and its word-family, and Πλάταια (leaving
aside some more doubtful cases). One can quibble about individual examples,
but it seems clear that this is a widespread phenomenon. The question is how to
account for it historically.


===== PDF PAGE 302 =====
292 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
I have argued above that a late survival of ∗ r̥ in epic Greek is not credible;
but what are the other options? Tichy (1981) suggests that these unexpectedly
light syllables are not really light; rather, they reflect a stage of the epic tradi-
tion in which the shape of the hexameter was not yet fixed, so that heavy syllables
could occur in places in which we might not have expected them. But the premise
on which this explanation is based is purely hypothetical: we have no other evi-
dence that there was ever such a stage of the epic tradition and no rigorous way
of reconstructing it (see the discussion of van Beek 2022: 49–54). Van Beek is
right to prefer to work with the hexameter as we have it. What we need is a ver-
sion of his analysis that does not posit implausible behavior on the part of native
speakers.
The question we need to ask is this: in an oral poetic tradition, how long could
inherited formulas whose shape had been altered so as to disrupt the structure
of the verse survive without being regularized? To answer that question we need
to look at other traditions of oral poetry. The Serbo-Croatian tradition is not
recorded over a long period of time, but the Old English (OE) tradition is; what
can we learn from it?
The metrical structure of OE verse is complex, but there is also another orga-
nizing principle, namely the alliteration of the initial consonants of stressed
words in fixed patterns (Sievers 1893). As it happens, the inherited word-initial
velars ∗k and (fricative) ∗ g were palatalized before front vowels early in the
prehistory of OE. That sound change must have occurred before the diphthon-
gization of front vowels by initial palatals in the West Saxon dialect, which in
turn occurred before i-umlaut, which in turn occurred before the regular syncope
of high vowels, which in turn occurred before three-consonant shortening—and
the last can be dated to the first half of the 7th century (Ringe and Taylor 2014:
281–4, 304). It seems that palatalization must have occurred well back in the
6th century at the latest. Yet palatal and velar consonants continue to alliter-
ate with each other in OE poetry. In the Battle of Maldon, which is datable to
shortly after 991 because the battle in question occurred in that year, there are
examples in lines 76, 100, and 256. It seems clear that anomalies validated by
tradition can, under favorable circumstances, persist in an oral poetic tradition
for well over four centuries. But if we accept the usual dating of the Home-
ric poems to the 8th century BC, an anomaly which arose in the 12th or even
the 13th century might not yet have been ‘ironed out’ completely. So far as I
can see, that is all that is needed to explain the Mu¨hlestein-Wathelet metrical
phenomena.
5.4.1 (iii) Other phonological innovations
This is perhaps the best place to mention two puzzling phenomena concerning
vowels in Greek verb inflection.


===== PDF PAGE 303 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 293
Two words recorded in Linear B appear to refer to baths: the adjective re-wo-
te-re-jo is best interpreted as ∗λεϝοτρεjος´ ‘for the bath’, while the compound re-
wo-to-ro-ko-wo is manifestly ∗λεϝοτροχοϝος´ ‘bath-pourer’ (Aura Jorro 1999 s.vv.).
But the Homeric word for ‘bath’ is (pl.) λοετρά, with compound λοετροχοος,´ and
the verb root is consistently λοε- (λοεον´ ‘I bathed (him)’ Od. 4.252, λοέσσομαι
‘I will bathe’ Od. 6.221, aor. λοέσσαι (etc.; eight times). Evidently there was a
metathesis, ∗λεϝο- > ∗λοϝε-. The same metathesis appears in aor. στορέσαι ‘to
spread out’, PIE root ∗sterh₃- (see Harðarson 1993: 222), and κορέσαι ‘to sate’,
PIE root ∗ḱerh₃- (p. 218). No such metathesis occurred in ∗λεϝοντ-, λέων ‘lion’,
γεροντ-, γέρων ‘old man’, Hom. μέροπες, Att.-Ion. περονη´   ‘fibula’, Att. βελονη´   ‘nee-
dle’, etc. It seems more than a little odd that this metathesis occurred only in verb
roots ending in the third laryngeal, especially since it was clearly a post-Mycenaean
development. No adequate explanation has been suggested (see the inconclusive
discussion of Cowgill 1965: 157–9 with references).
Possibly connected with that peculiarity is an anomaly in the root-syllables of
four thematic aorists:
aorist present root
θορε˜ν ‘leap’ θρ ωσκε¯ν´ ∗dʰerh₃- (?; see 3.2.3)
μολε˜ν ‘come, go’ βλ ωσκε¯ν´ ∗melh₃- (?)
πορε˜ν ‘grant’ — ∗perh₃-
τορε˜ν ‘wound’ τιτρ ωσκε¯ν´ ∗terh₃- (?)
Though three of the four roots have very sparse cognates in other IE languages (see
the LIV s.vv.), the pattern is clear: in thematic aorists whose root ends in a liquid
plus the third laryngeal, the αρ or αλ which we expect as the reflex of ∗ r̥ or ∗l̥ before
a vowel appears instead as ορ or ολ even in dialects in which the o-vocalism is not
normal. In this case too there is no generally accepted explanation. Remodeling of
an ablaut Rω: ∗αR to Rω: oR on the model of Rᾱ: αR (Cowgill 1965: 147–8 with
references) seems at least possible, but then why was βλη-: βαλε˜ν not remodeled
to yield ∗βελε˜ν?
A post-Mycenaean innovation which appears to be pan-Greek is the change of
∗κσ to χ when immediately followed by a nasal. Five examples seem reasonably
secure:
(post-)PIE ∗ayḱsmo- ‘sharp point’ or the like (cf. Lith. iẽšmas ‘spit (for roasting)’
> PGk ∗αἰκσμᾱ́ ‘spear-point’ (Myc. acc. pl. ai-ka-sa-ma) > αἰχμᾱ́ > Att.-Ion.
αἰχμή;
PGk ∗λύκσνος ‘light, lamp’ (PIE root ∗lewk-) > λύχνος;
PGk ∗τέκσνᾱ ‘craft’ (PIE root ∗teḱ- ‘fashion, create’) > τέχνᾱ > Att.-Ion. τέχνη;
PGk ∗πλοκσμος´ ‘plait, braid’ (PIE root ∗plek-, cf. pres. πλέκε¯ν) > Hom.
πλοχμ´ος;


===== PDF PAGE 304 =====
294 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
PGk ∗ῥωκσμος´ ‘break, cleft’ (cf. pres. ῥηγνύναι) > Hom. ῥωχμ´ος.
There are a few other probable or plausible examples.
5.4.2 Early morphological innovations
5.4.2 (i) Innovations in verb morphology
The distribution of Arkadian primary mediopassive -(σ)οι, -τοι, -ντοι, Cyprian
ke-i-to-i Masson 11.2, Mycenaean (3sg., 3pl.) -to¹⁵ vs. -(σ)αι, -ται, -νται (or their
subsequent developments) in all other dialects, so far as the relevant endings are
attested, was discussed in 4.2.6 (iv); I there suggested that the ‘Achaian’ endings
with -οι are in fact inherited. If that is true, then the -αι of the other dialects, leveled
from 1sg. -μαι, must have spread through a dialect continuum, probably at a very
early date.
The inherited sigmatic aorist has been extended with ‘alphathematic’ vowels,
active 3sg. -ε in all dialects, otherwise -α(-) in most. Pamphylian, however, presents
us with thematic forms instead:
ἐβōλα ̄́σετυ ‘he advised’ (?) Brixhe 3.8;
κατεϝέρξοδυ ‘let them enclose’ (?) 3.12;
δᾱμιοργίσōσα ‘having been damiorga’ 17.2–3.
It is unclear whether the Pamphylian sigmatic aorist originally had a stem in -σα-
but later interpreted 3sg. -ε as thematic and leveled it through the paradigm; or
extended the inherited -σ- with the thematic vowel from the first (cf. Brixhe 1976:
116). Two things at least are clear. One is that the Pamphylian forms have nothing
to do with the ‘mixed aorists’ of Homer, which Roth (1990) convincingly explains
as secondary developments, mostly confined to the epic tradition. The other is
that, if Pamphylian did choose an alternative vowel for the sigmatic aorist from the
start, the divergence happened early, given that we find forms such as de-ka-sa-to
∗δέξατο in Mycenaean.
Also likely to have been early is the spread of the future in -σέε/ο-, of which a
few examples occur in Attic-Ionic (e.g. Homeric ἐσσε˜ται (thrice), Attic πεσε˜σθαι,
πλευσε˜σθαι) to all futures originally in -σε/ο-, apparently throughout the West
Greek area (Buck 1955: 115, Ruijgh 2007: 422–3). Still more widespread is the
replacement of -σσ- by -ξ- in futures and sigmatic aorists to presents in -ζε/ο-;
it is prevalent, though not always consistent, in all dialects except Attic-Ionic,
¹⁵ See Bartoněk (2002: 307–23) for a list of the more or less certain Mycenaean examples of verb
forms.


===== PDF PAGE 305 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 295
Lesbian, and Pamphylian (Buck 1955: 115–16). However, that particular change
seems more likely to have happened independently; there are a few Homeric exam-
ples (including the archaic ἀβροτάξομεν Il. 10.65), and in Attic-Ionic the reverse
change is attested (e.g. in ἁρπάσαι). Thus little can be said about its origins or
relative chronology.
Various innovations which probably occurred early are found over substan-
tial discontinuous areas of the Greek Sprachraum. Athematic inflection of con-
tract presents is well attested in Lesbian, Pelasgiote Thessalian, and Arkadian,
e.g.:
κάλημι ‘I’m calling’ Sappho 1.16, ἐ]π´οημεν ‘we used to make’ 24.4, χάλαισι
‘they’re going slack’ Alkaios 208.9, gen. sg. τέχνᾱν τεχνᾱμένω ‘one who
commits fraud’ DGE 620.10;¹⁶
Pelasgiote Thess. [στρατᾱ]γέντος ‘while … was general’ DGE 578A.1, διετέ]λει
εὐεργετές ‘continues to be a benefactor’ l. 10, γυμνασιαρχέντος DGE 590.2,
dat. pl. κατοικέντεσσι ‘inhabitants’ l. 14;
Ark. ᾱ̓ πυέσθω ὁ ἀδικήμενος τὸν ἀδικέντα ‘let the one who is being wronged
challenge the one who is doing wrong’ DGE 656.3–4, ποέντω ‘let them
make available’ l. 10, κεὐορκέντι ‘and to the one who keeps his oath’
DGE 665.17–18.
In addition, Cyprian attests an infinitive ku-me-re-na-i ∗κυμερῆναι ‘κυβερνᾶν, to
steer’ Masson 264.4. The agreement of Arkadian and Cyprian strongly argues that
this innovation occurred in those dialects before the Dorian immigration.
A new secondary 3pl. ending -αν replacing old -(ε)ν appears in Cyprian, Arka-
dian, Boiotian, and Lokrian. The original postconsonantal zero-grade ending ∗ -n̥ d
> ∗-ąδ > ∗-α, which appeared at least in the sigmatic aorist, had been remodeled to
-αν in all the dialects, presumably after its vowel lost its nasalization and its final
consonant was lost (see 4.2.6 (i)); it is the spread of that ending at the expense
of other alternants that is in question here. The aorist 3pl. of compounds of ‘put’,
mostly meaning ‘dedicate’, is especially well attested, e.g.:
Cyprian ka-te-ti-ja-ne∗κατέθιjαν Masson 217.27;
Ark. συνέθεαν ‘they have contributed’ DGE 664.27–8;
Boiot. ἀνέθιαν DGE 446.1;
Lokrian ἀνέθεαν DGE 359.3.
Once again the agreement of Arkadian and Cyprian argues a common develop-
ment in those dialects early in the Dark Ages. In Attic-Ionic the ending -αν spread
¹⁶ The situation in Lesbian is certainly more complex. For the poets, see Hamm (1958: 138–44).
Hodot (1990: 192–4), in discussing the epigraphical examples, suggests that contractions of vowels
(on which, see 7.2.3) ultimately gave rise to athematic inflection in Lesbian.


===== PDF PAGE 306 =====
296 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
to the imperfect of ‘be’, yielding 3sg. ∗ἦς, 3pl. ἦσαν; the dramatic consequences of
that change will be charted in Chapter 6.
Similar, but probably later, is the adjustment of primary 3pl. -ατι, South Greek
-ασι, to -αντι and (∗)-ανσι > -ᾱσι. The latter is universal in Attic-Ionic but is not
certainly attested in Arkadian;¹⁷ it therefore seems unlikely that this change pre-
ceded the assibilation of -τι, though it clearly did precede the second compensatory
lengthening (see 6.2 and 7.2.1). Unassibilated -αντι appears in various West Greek
dialects at different dates, e.g.:
West Argolic ἐπιμεμηνᾱ́ καντι DGE 91.11;
Rhodian ἐξεστρατεύκαντι DGE 288.48;
Phokian ἀνατεθέκαντι IG IX-1.66.10.
The same innovation appears in Boiot. -ανθι (e.g. ἀποδεδ´οανθι DGE 526.35),
though the aspirate in the ending is of uncertain origin; for a list of Boiotian (and
Thessalian) examples and the two hypotheses regarding the aspiration—neither
very plausible—see Scarborough (2016: 156–61).
I argued in 4.2.1 (ii) that the distinctive double-nasal-affixed presents of Greek
are an innovation, beginning with χανδάνε¯ν ‘grasp’, λαγχάνε¯ν ‘get by lot’, and
μανθάνε¯ν ‘learn’, in which the apparent nasal infix was etymologically part of the
root. Presents of that type spread slowly but apparently steadily to other verbs
throughout the early history of Ancient Greek. Already in Homer λανθάνε¯ν is
in competition with λήθε¯ν and πυνθάνεσθαι (Od. 2.315, 13.256) with πεύθεσθαι
(sixteen times);¹⁸ ἁνδάνε¯ν has apparently ousted ἥδεσθαι (though the latter is
well attested in Herodotos and Attic, while ῎ᾱδομ(αι) appears in Sappho 95.10),
and τυγχάνε¯ν has undergone lexical split from τεύχε¯ν. In later Greek the most
important addition to this class was λαμβάνε¯ν, originally ‘grasp, seize’ but increas-
ingly ‘take’, encroaching on αἱρε˜ν. In Homer the present of this verb is consis-
tently λάζεσθαι, and the same present appears sporadically in later Greek (e.g.
λα]ζ´ομενος DGE 168.4 at Khalkedon, a colony of Megara). It appears remod-
eled as ἐλάζυτο in l. 316 of the long Homeric hymn to Hermes, and the linguistic
reality of such an odd stem is confirmed by Boiotian λάδδουσθη (DGE 550g); it
must owe its -υ- to αἴνυσθαι ‘grasp, take’ and possibly ἄρνυσθαι ‘get, gain’, nei-
ther of which has any other aspect stem. But λαμβάνε¯ν is the present in most
dialects from the 5th century on. Other post-Homeric examples of these presents,
¹⁷ The only secure examples are [ϝō]φλε ̄́ασι DGE 661.1 and ἐσλελοίπασι 657.22. There is a possible
ἀ̣π(υδ)ε̣ δ ´ωκανσ̣ ι ̣at IG V-2.6.82, but the context is damaged and the form emended; it seems possible
that it is really an aorist ἀπέδωκαν. If it really is a perfect 3pl. in -ανσι, it shows an innovation within
the history of the subdialect of Tegea, from which ἐσλελοίπασι is also attested.
¹⁸ This distribution argues strongly that πυνθάνεσθαι is an innovation, not a true cognate of nasal-
infixed stems in other IE languages (cf. LIV s.v. ∗bʰeṷdʰ, fn. 3).


===== PDF PAGE 307 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 297
such as κατελίμπανεν Sappho 94.2, ἀπυλιμπάνω l. 5, are probably innovations
as well.
One consonant-final root-present underwent an interesting development in
post-Homeric Greek. I argued in 4.2.1 (i) that δεκ- ‘receive’ is a present rather
than an aorist, largely on the grounds of 3pl. δέχαται Il. 12.147, which can hardly
be anything else. In later Greek (and to some extent even in Homer) this present
has been thematized. In most dialects the result is δέκεσθαι, with an etymologically
correct κ, but in Attic it is δέχεσθαι, with the χ of the 3pl. forms leveled through the
paradigm.¹⁹ But in this case Attic was repeating an earlier Attic-Ionic development
in another paradigm; see 6.3 for further discussion.
5.4.2 (ii) Innovations in nominal morphology
The syntactic merger of the dative and locative cases must have occurred early,
but probably not in Proto-Greek. Though only the ending -σι (← loc. pl. ∗-su, with
the vowel leveled from sg. ∗-i) occurs in the plural,²⁰ both loc. sg. ∗-i and dat.
sg. ∗ -ey are attested, though not in clearly different functions. The former is the
usual consonant-stem dat. sg. ending in 1st-millennium Greek and appears also
in Mycenaean as s-stem -e-i /-eh-i/ (see the discussions of Hajnal 1995: 227–46,
Thompson 1997: 327–9); the latter appears as -e in the paradigms of Mycenaean
consonant stems (Bartoněk 2002: 225 ff.), as well as in Hom. Δι(ϝ)είφιλος ‘friend
to Zeus’. It seems unlikely that both singular endings could have survived to be
attested if the syntactic merger had occurred in PGk, though of course that cannot
be excluded entirely. In the post-Mycenaean dialects there is always only a single
case, but more than one set of endings survive. For ‘third-declension’ nominals
the endings are always sg. -ι, pl. -σι, but for the other stems we find sg. -ωι, -ᾱι or
-οι, -αι and pl. -οις, -αις or -οισι, -ᾱσι → -αισι (Att.-Ion. -ησι → -ηισι → -αισι). The
distribution of alternative endings is complicated. In the singular the short diph-
thongs appear early in Arkadian, Elean, and Boiotian (where they become -ῡ, i.e.
/-ø:/, and -η by regular sound change) and could be old locative endings; elsewhere
they appear later and might be the results of phonologically regular shortening of
the long diphthongs (Buck 1955: 88). In the plural the longer endings, reflecting
old locatives, are characteristic of Attic-Ionic, Lesbian, East Argolic, and Cretan
(pp. 86, 88). In all those dialects they are steadily replaced by the shorter endings,
reflecting old o-stem instrumentals, except in Lesbian, where the acc. pl. forms
ended in -οις, -αις by regular sound change (see 7.2.1) and the retention of the
longer dat. pl. forms served to distinguish the two cases.
An innovation which clearly spread through the dialect continuum after the
Mycenaean period is the remodeling of the masc. and neut. perfect participle.
¹⁹ Thematic forms with χ in our text of Homer are of course transmission Atticisms (cf. Wackernagel
1916: 23–9).
²⁰ -οις is the old inst. pl. ending; see 2.3.4 (i) and further below.


===== PDF PAGE 308 =====
298 THE INITIAL DIVERSIFICATION OF GREEK DIALECTS
The Linear B tablets attest two indisputable neut. nom. pl. forms, a-ra-ru-wo-a
∗ἀραρϝ´οhα  ‘fitted’ and te-tu-ko-wo-a₂ (also -a) ∗τετυχϝ´οhα  ‘fashioned, con-
structed’, as well as several probable masc. nom. pl. forms in -wo-e (Bartoněk 2002:
331); none exhibits the -τ- of later Greek. Szemerényi (1967b: 7–17) established
conclusively that that -τ- has nothing to do with the Skt alternant -vat-, nor with
Goth. weitwods ‘witness’; it must have arisen within Greek at some point after the
collapse of Mycenaean civilization. Though there are other examples of σ-stems
being partly replaced by τ-stems (pp. 20–3), it seems obvious that the other active
participles in -ντ- had something to do with this particular case (p. 23); in fact Les-
bian, Thessalian, and Boiotian remodeled the suffix to -ϝοντ- (see 5.2.1), and one
might have expected the other dialects to do the same. Szemerényi, who worked
with proportional analogy, suggested (p. 24) that the parallel between dat. pl. pf. ∗ -
ϝ´οσ-σι and zero-grade pres. (∗)-ασ-σι was the ‘pivot’ of the analogical proportion;
but both positive and negative exceptions to proportional analogy are so numer-
ous that it cannot be a realistic model of morphological change (Ringe and Eska
2013: 152–3). Moreover, even if one insists on working with proportions, this one
is exceptionally shaky: the dat. pl. is too infrequently heard by native learners to
prompt a wholesale morphological change, and it is not even clear that ∗-σσ- < ∗ -
s+s- was not simplified in the prehistory of Greek (see the discussion of Morpurgo
Davies 1976). A different line of argument seems more plausible. The nom. sg.
masc. in apposition with a subject—especially ∗ϝειδϝως´ ‘knowingly, deliberately’—
must have been the form most often heard. If a three-year-old had to guess at a
stem from that one form, what would the result likely be? An outcome ∗ϝειδϝ´οτ- is
actually reasonable, especially if the native learner already knew that other active
participles ended in -ντ-, and that is possibly all that needs to be said.
Similar in its timing and in its effects was the remodeling of the older type of
comparative adjectives. Here too Mycenaean attests only stems in ∗-oh-: masc.-
fem. nom. pl. me-zo-e, me-u-jo-e ~ me-wi-jo-e, ka-zo-e, a-ro₂-e and neut. nom.
pl. me-zo-a₂, me-u-jo-a₂, a-ro-a (Bartoněk 2002: 269–70). Precisely those forms,
as well as the masc.-fem. acc. sg. in -α, survive throughout Attic-Ionic, e.g. as
Att. με̄́ ζˉος²¹  and μεζω. ̄́ But all other forms are ν-stems, e.g. Att. μεζων, ̄́ μεζονες, ̄́
and even the surviving σ-stem forms are in competition with the corresponding
ν-stem forms. The discussion of Szemerényi (1968b) demolished the supposed
connection with Germanic ∗-iz-an-; this innovation too is confined to Greek. It
seems clear that the source of the innovation was ἀμείνων ‘better’, an old ν-stem
adjective which happened to develop a comparative meaning (Seiler 1950: 14,
²¹ In Attic also acc. pl.; see Ringe and Eska (2013: 183–4). Forms in -ω occur occasionally in literary
Doric—I can find ἥσσω Simonides 581.5, ἀρείω Bakkhylides 9.91, μείζω Pindar Isthmian I.63—but
not in the Lesbian poets. I have found no epigraphical examples, though a Lakonian ἐλάσσως is listed
at Buck (1955: 42).


===== PDF PAGE 309 =====
5.4 OTHER WIDELY SHARED E ARLY INNOVATIONS 299
Szemerényi 1968b: 30). Exactly how -ν- spread to the ‘real’ comparatives is dif-
ficult to reconstruct; once again the construction of analogical proportions does
not help much.
Though the masculine ᾱ-stem gen. sg. ending -ᾱο can be reconstructed for
Proto-Greek (see 4.3.5 with references), nom. sg. -ᾱς cannot; the more archaic
ending -ᾱ is well attested in Boiotian and in the far northwest of Greece, and
many examples are comparatively early (Morpurgo 1961: 105–6). The innovative
-ᾱς must have spread through the dialect continuum, probably early, though the
chronology is not recoverable.
Finally, a dative plural ending -εσσι is widespread: it occurs in Homer (part of
the epic dialect’s Aiolic component), in Lesbian, Thessalian, Boiotian, Lokrian,
Delphian, Elean, Pamphylian, and sporadically elsewhere (Buck 1955: 89). It is
striking that most of these dialects constitute a continuous block across northern
Greece from the Asia Minor seaboard to Delphi and beyond, and it is at least pos-
sible that the new ending arose in one of those dialects and spread gradually to
the others at an early date, though it probably arose independently in other, non-
contiguous dialects. The origin of this ending has been disputed for more than
a century; the best presentations of the alternatives are Morpurgo Davies (1976)
(-ες, -εσσι remodeled on -οι, -οισι) and Cassio (2018) (generalization of s-stem
-εσ-σι without simplification of the geminate), both with references.
5.4.2 (iii) ‘Into’
Somewhat later, to judge from its distribution, was the creation of a new prepo-
sition ἐνς ‘into’. The inherited system, in which ἐν with the accusative indicated
motion but with the dative position (roughly as in Latin), was preserved in Thes-
salian, Boiotian, the northern West Greek dialects (including Elean), Arkadian,
and Cyprian; the new preposition with the accusative appears in Lesbian, Attic-
Ionic, the Doric dialects, and Pamphylian (!)—in other words, in dialects which
might be expected to have been on the trade routes in the Dark Ages. This is an
especially good example of an innovation which probably spread widely by con-
tact between dialects. The new preposition came into existence before the sound
changes which affected the cluster νς, and before the raising of ε before nasals in
Pamphylian, since the outcome was ἰς in that dialect (Brixhe 3.4, etc.). The -ς is
obviously that of ἐξ, but it is not clear that direct lexical analogy was involved; also
thinkable is the prior construction of an adverb ∗ἔνσω parallel to ἔξω, followed by
extraction of ἐνς from the former, parallel to ἐξ.
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0005


===== PDF PAGE 310 =====
6
The Attic-Ionic dialects
6.1 Introduction
So far as I know, the close relationship between the Attic and Ionic dialects has
never been questioned; yet even this obvious group is defined to a considerable
extent by innovations which spread through a continuum of dialects in contact.
We can say that with some confidence because the chronology of sound changes
that affected these dialects is to some extent recoverable, as follows.
6.2 Attic and Ionic sound changes
The defining characteristic of Attic-Ionic is the fronting of inherited ᾱ, e.g.:
PIE acc. ∗pĺ̥h₂mām ‘flat hand’ (Lat. palmam) > ∗πάλαμᾱν > Hom. παλάμην;
PIE ∗bʰéretām ‘the two of them were carrying’, with augment ∗é bʰeretām (Skt
ábʰaratām) > ἐφερέτᾱν > Att.-Ion. ἐφερέτην;
PIE ∗bʰāǵʰus ‘arm’ (∗-ah₂-?; Skt bāhús) > πᾶχυς ‘forearm’ > Att.-Ion. πῆχυς;
PIE ∗swáh₂dus ‘pleasant, sweet’ (Skt svādús) > ᾱ̔ δύς > Att.-Ion. ἡδύς;
PIE ∗stáh₂t ‘(s)he stood up’ (Skt ástʰāt with augment) > ἔστᾱ (also with
augment) > Att.-Ion. ἔστη;
PIE ∗bʰah₂ti ‘it shines, it illuminates’ (Skt bʰāti) → ‘(s)he makes clear’ → ‘(s)he
says’ (cf. Lat. fātur) > φᾱτι > Att.-Ion. φησι;
post-PIE deriv. ∗bʰoh₂náh₂ ‘voice’ (cf. Beekes 1972: 129) > φωνᾱ́ > Att.-Ion.
φωνή;
PIE ∗Hyéh₁gʷah₂ ‘strength’ vel sim. (Lith. jė́ ga) > ἥβᾱ ‘youth’ > Att.-Ion. ἥβη;
PIE ah₂-stem dat. sg. ∗-ah₂-ay (Goth. -ai) > -ᾱι > Att.-Ion. -ηι;
PIE ∗é h₂aǵed ‘it is said that (s)he was leading/driving’ (Skt ā́ jat ‘(s)he drove’)
> ἆγε ‘(s)he was leading’ > Att.-Ion. ἦγε;
PIE ∗dm̥ h₂tós ‘built’ (for the laryngeal-final root, cf. Toch. B /tsəma-/ ‘grow’)
> ∗δμᾱτ´ος  in νε´οδμᾱτος  ‘new-built’ (Pindar Isthmian IV.62) > Att.-Ion.
νε´οδμητος;
PIE ∗ḱm̥ h₂tós ‘tired’ (remodeled in Skt ´sāntás ‘resting, quiet’) > ∗κμᾱτ´ος in
Hom. h. ἄκμητος ‘tireless’;
PIE ∗dʰn̥ h₂tós ‘fleeting’ (?; Skt dʰánvat ‘it flows’, LIV s.v. ∗dʰenh₂) > θνᾱτος´
‘mortal’ > Att.-Ion. θνητ´ος;


===== PDF PAGE 311 =====
6.2 ATTIC AND IONIC SOUND CHANGES 301
PIE ∗tl̥h₂tós ‘lifted, liftable’ (cf. Lat. lātus ‘carried, brought’) > τλᾱτος´ ‘bearable,
endurable’ > Att.-Ion. τλητ´ος.
That sound change occurred after the first compensatory lengthening, since ᾱ that
the 1CL created were fronted, e.g.:
PIE ∗h₂áwsōs ‘dawn’ → ∗h₂usṓs (Skt uṣā́ s) > ∗ἀϝh ´ως  > Dor. ᾱ ̔ ϝ ´ως,  Hom. ἠ ´ως,
Att. ἕως;
pre-Gk ∗σελάhνᾱ ‘moon’ (cf. σέλας ‘torch’) > Dor. σελᾱ́ νᾱ, Att.-Ion. σελήνη;
pre-Gk ∗ναhϝ´ος  ‘temple’ (cf. Hom. ναίε¯ν  ‘to dwell’) > Dor. νᾱϝ´ος,  Hom. νη´ος,
Att. νε ως;´
PGk ∗στάλλᾱ ‘standing stone’ > στᾱ́ λᾱ > Att.-Ion. στήλη.
The fronting occurred in Attic, West Ionic (of Oropos and Euboia), Cycladic Ionic
(of Keos, Naxos, Delos, Amorgos, etc.), and East Ionic (of the Asia Minor seaboard
and the islands immediately offshore).
However, the outcome of the Attic-Ionic fronting was at first not identical with η;
it must have been lower, i.e. ∗ǣ (Vendryès 1920: 65–6). A vowel system including
this intermediate ∗ǣ is directly attested in several early inscriptions in Cycladic
Ionic (Vendryès 1920: 65–6, Schwyzer 1923: 364), of which the most extensive
is the boustrophedon inscription on the Stele of Nikandre (DGE 758, Buck 6). It
seems best to give a close transcription of the actual letters (see Jeffery 1991: 291–2
with plate 55: 2):
NIKANΔPHMANEΘEKENHKHBΟΛΟIIΟXEAIPHIϘΟPHΔEINΟ
ΔIKHΟTΟNA ΣIΟE ΣΟXΟΣAΛHΟNΔEINΟMENEΟΣΔEKAΣIΓNETH
ΦHPA ΣΟΔAΛΟXΟΣN
A more or less standard transcription and interpretation is:
Nῑκάνδρη μ’ ἀνέθε¯κεν hεκηβ´ ͜ολōι  ιοχεαίρηι, ̄̓
ϙṓρη Δεινο|δίκηο τõ Nαhσίō ἔhσοχος ἀλ(λ)ήōν,
Δεινομένεος δὲ κασιγνε̄́ τη, | Φhράhσō δ’ ἄλοχος ν[˜υν].
‘Nikandre dedicated me to the arrow-handed shootafar [i.e. Artemis],
daughter of Deinodikes the Naxian, outstanding above (all) others,
sister of Deinomenes, now the wife of Phraxos.’
The letter eta, a box with a crossbar, is used both for the sequence hε and for the
η that resulted from the Attic-Ionic fronting (in Nῑκάνδρη, hε ͜κηβ´ολōι,  ῑ̓ οχεαίρηι,
ϙṓρη, Δεινοδίκηο, ἀλ(λ)ήōν, κασιγνε̄́ τη), but not for inherited η, which is spelled ε¯
(in ἀνέθε¯κεν, κασιγνε̄́ τη); that must reflect a difference in pronunciation.¹ On
indirect evidence for the existence of ∗ǣ in early Attic-Ionic, see further below.
¹ Of course the two vowels might conceivably have merged by the time the text was cut; the spellings
Δεινοδίκηο and ἀλ(λ)ήōν, in which η and a following o-vowel need to be read as monosyllables, seem


===== PDF PAGE 312 =====
302 THE ATTIC-IONIC DIALECTS
Early in the sequence of Attic-Ionic sound changes the sequence ∗εǣ contracted
to ∗ǣ. The product of that contraction behaved exactly like inherited ∗ǣ; for
instance, Attic fem. χρῡσῆ ‘golden’ < ∗χρῡσέǣ exhibits -ῆ throughout the sin-
gular while ἀργυρᾶ ‘of silver’ < ∗ἀργυρέǣ exhibits -ᾶ, exactly as expected by
Attic retraction (see below). This contraction occurred at least before the loss
of intervocalic ∗ϝ, since hiatuses created by that loss typically remain uncon-
tracted; it cannot be shown that any sound change other than fronting preceded
∗εǣ > ∗ǣ.
At some time after the fronting of inherited ᾱ, new ᾱ’s arose by the second com-
pensatory lengthening and by the contraction of short α with following e-vowels;
the former will be discussed in 7.2.1 (since it is not confined to Attic-Ionic), the lat-
ter at the end of this section. Neither of those changes can be placed more precisely
in the relative chronology of sound changes because they did not interact cru-
cially with any others. It needs to be emphasized that the structuralist arguments of
Szemerényi (1968a: 1341–50) and Samuels (2017) regarding the supposed mutual
influence of phonemes in a system are unreliable because they are based on the
theories of André Martinet, which have been shown to be untenable (see King
1967, Surendran and Niyogi 2006). Chain shifts do occur, but we do not know
what drives them; we have to conclude that functional load does not drive them,
since we cannot predict when chain shifts will occur and when mergers will occur.
Sound changes can be placed in a relative chronology only if they feed or bleed
each other.
At some point after the fronting, a sequence ∗ǣ … ǣ in successive syllables was
dissimilated to ∗η … ǣ in Attica and in at least some of the Cyclades (Vendryès,
op. cit.). For the Attic dialect there are at least three clear examples:
PIE ∗krásnah₂ ‘moving water’ vel sim. (ON hrǫnn ‘wave’) > ∗kráhnā > κρᾱ́ νᾱ
‘spring’ (attested in Arkadian and in Doric dialects) > ∗κρǣ́ νǣ > ∗κρήνǣ >
Att. κρήνη;
PGk ∗parawhā́ ‘cheek’ (lit. ‘(thing) beside the ear’; cf. Lesbian voc. μᾱλ]ọπάραυε
‘apple-cheeked’ Hamm 1958: 204, and see Peters 1980: 295–7) > ∗παρᾱϝᾱ́
(cf. Myc. pa-ra-wa-jo ‘cheek-piece (of a helmet)’, gen. εὐπαρᾱ́ ου Pindar
Pythian XII.16) > ∗παρǣϝǣ́ (cf. Hom. καλλιπάρηος) > ∗παρηϝǣ́ > ∗παρηǣ́
> ∗παρηᾱ́ > παρεᾱ́ (Szemerényi 1968a: 1351; see further the end of this
section);²
to show that the spelling of this inscription was somewhat archaizing. But the point is the same: ∗ǣ
and η had not merged on Naxos at the time the orthography became semistandardized. Italic h in my
transcription represents a box without a crossbar, which in this inscription is used with σ to write the
cluster spelled ξ in the standard 4th-century Ionic alphabet that we still use.
² It is true that this word is spelled with ε only once, in an Attic inscription, while two other epigraph-
ical Attic examples are spelled with ει (see LSJ s.v. παρειά); but the Lesbian and Doric forms strongly
suggest that the Attic vowel was etymologically ε. I am grateful to Philomen Probert for calling this
distribution to my attention.


===== PDF PAGE 313 =====
6.2 ATTIC AND IONIC SOUND CHANGES 303
ɩ̓̄ρά̄ νᾱ ‘peace’ (attested in Arkadian, Boiotian, and West Greek) > ∗ɩ̓̄ρǽ̄ νǣ >
∗ɩ̓̄ρήνǣ > Att. ἐ̄ ρήνη.³
Obviously the dissimilation must have occurred before the retraction of ∗ǣ to ᾱ
following ρ in Attic (see below).
For Cycladic Ionic the evidence for dissimilation is provided by the text of
Bakkhylides. Like his uncle Simonides, Bakkhylides was born and raised in Iulis on
Keos. His native dialect can only have been Ionic, but because he wrote choral lyric
poetry, he wrote in literary Doric. Normally he presents us with unshifted Doric
ᾱ wherever it is etymologically correct, but there are a few exceptions, notably:
Φήμᾱ Bakkhylides 2.1, acc. φήμᾱν 5.194;
dat. εἰρήν[ᾱι 5.200, εἰ[ρ]ήνᾱι 13.189, nom. εἰρήνᾱ fragm. 4.61.
The most plausible explanation is that the dissimilation occurred also in Kean
Ionic, and that ∗ǣ had not yet merged with η when Bakkhylides was acquiring his
native dialect in the years just before 510 BC; the poet regularly replaced his native
/ǣ/ with Doric ᾱ, but in the words where dissimilation had occurred the penul-
timate syllable now contained η, which he did not alter (Tucker 1962: 499). To
be sure, various forms of εἰρήνᾱ also occur in Pindar (Olympian XIII.7, Pythian
IX.23, Nemean I.69), who was Boiotian. But it is possible that their η was intro-
duced into the text by the Alexandrian grammarians—note that the initial εἰ- must
be an Atticism in any case; alternatively, the usage of Bakkhylides might be older
than its attestation can tell us, and in that case the shape of this particular word
might already have become part of the choral tradition. More difficult to explain
is ɩ̄̓ ρ]ήνᾱς in the Louvre Partheneion (Alkman 1.91); if its η is not also a gram-
marians’ fiction, then the shape of ‘peace’ in any given dialect might not be good
evidence for much of anything.
In Attic ∗ǣ then underwent a split: it was retracted to ᾱ in specific environ-
ments; subsequently surviving ∗ǣ merged with η. Those developments interacted
with two other changes, the loss of ϝ and the contraction of εα. Unfortunately
there is a non-negligible probability that all three changes in question were not
single historical events: retraction when a front vowel preceded and retraction
³ In addition to the forms cited here, there are a number of non-Attic-Ionic forms that exhibit a
long e-vowel in the second syllable; Frisk s.v. εἰρήνη therefore suggests that this is a non-Greek word
that was borrowed into various dialects independently. I am not convinced. The fact that both gen. sg.
ɩρᾱ̓ ̄́ ν[ᾱς and dat. sg. ɩ ̄̓ρείνᾳ are attested in 3rd-century Thessalian inscriptions from Larisa (DGE 588.5,
589.5) can only mean that the latter is a superficially Thessalianized Attic koine form (cf. Brixhe 1976:
140 on a similar late Pamphylian name); at least some other late examples are susceptible to the same
explanation (Vendryès 1920: 64). Whether Pamphylian ἰρε¯νι (Brixhe 3.7) even means ‘peace’ is not
clear from its fragmentary context. The ɩρήνᾱ̄̓ of Bacchylides and Pindar will be explained below. Most
surprising is a 2nd-century Cretan phrase καὶ πολέμω χ[ɩ ̄̓]|ρήνᾱς in what appears to be a pure dialect
inscription (DGE 186.6–7), but it seems possible that the word was borrowed from Cycladic Ionic, as
Vendryès suggests.


===== PDF PAGE 314 =====
304 THE ATTIC-IONIC DIALECTS
when ρ preceded need not have occurred at the same time, since the triggers
(and therefore the phonetic rationale) for the change were different; ϝ is likely
to have been lost between vowels before it was lost when a consonant preceded;
and the contraction of vowels is known to have been a lengthy process attended by
much synchronic variation, since identical etymological sequences do not always
yield identical results. The following discussion will try to work out what can
be said for certain about the relative chronology of these developments in Attic.
The most important discussions of this problem are Szemerényi (1968a), Gates
(1976), Peters (1980: 295–305), and Samuels (2017), all of which provide valuable
insights.⁴
The Attic retraction of ∗ǣ to ᾱ when ρ immediately preceded occurred after dis-
similation (see above), but before the loss of ∗ϝ immediately following a consonant.
Two examples demonstrate the latter:
PGk ∗κ´ορϝᾱ  ‘girl’ (Myc. ko-wa, Ark. dat. K´ορϝᾱι  DGE 676(1)) > ∗κ´ορϝǣ > Ion.
κṓρη, Att. ∗κ´ορǣ  > κ´ορη;
PGk. ∗δερϝᾱ ‘neck’ (accent?; Ark. acc. δερϝᾱν DGE 664.14) > ∗δερϝǣ > Ion.
δε¯ρή, Att. ∗δέρǣ > δέρη.
In both cases ∗ǣ would have been retracted in Attic if ∗ϝ had not still been in place
when retraction occurred.⁵ Examples of retraction triggered by an immediately
preceding ρ are numerous; those with cognates in other IE languages include:
PIE ∗bʰráh₂tēr ‘brother’ (Skt bʰrā́ tā, Lat. frāter, Goth. broþar) > ∗φρǣ́ τηρ >
Att. φρᾱ́ τηρ ‘member of a phratry, fellow-clansman’;
PIE aor. ∗drah₂- ‘run’ (Skt iptv. 3sg. drā́ tu) > ∗δρǣ- in Att. ἀποδρᾶναι ‘to run
away’;
PIE ∗ḱr̥ h₂tós ‘mixed’ (cf. Skt ā́ -´sīrtas ‘mixed’, RV VIII.2.9) > ∗κρǣτ´ος in Hom.
ἄκρητος, Att. ἄκρᾱτος ‘unmixed’;
PIE ∗ pr̥ h₂tós ‘sold’ (for the laryngeal-final root cf. OIr. renaid ‘(s)he sells’) >
∗πρǣτ´ος  > Att. πρᾱτ´ος  ‘sold’;
PIE ∗h₁rudʰráh₂ fem. ‘red’ (Lat. rubra) > ∗ἐρυθρǣ́ > Att. ἐρυθρᾱ́ .
Nouns in ∗-ρǣ > -ρᾱ do not usually have exact cognates outside of Greek, but a
few are made to inherited roots and appear to be relatively old, e.g.:
∗χήρǣ ‘widow’ (cf. Lat. hērēs ‘heir’) > Hom., Ion. χήρη, Att. χήρᾱ (masc. χῆρος
does not predate the 5th century);
⁴ But note that Gates is led astray by failure to recognize dissimilation in παρεα ̄́.
⁵ It is therefore surprising that Ion. α ̄̓ρή ‘prayer, imprecation, curse’ < ∗ἀρϝα ̄́(cf. Ark. acc. κάταρϝον
‘under the curse’ DGE 654.4–5) appears in Attic as ἀρα ̄́, not ‘ἀρή’. Backformation from the verb ἀρᾶσθαι
is the most likely explanation (see Schwyzer 1939: 188 fn. 2 with references).


===== PDF PAGE 315 =====
6.2 ATTIC AND IONIC SOUND CHANGES 305
∗ἕδρǣ ‘seat’ (cf. Lat. sella) > Hom., Ion. ἕδρη, Att. ἕδρᾱ;
∗θέφρǣ ‘burnt material, ashes’ (cf. Skt dáhati ‘(s)he burns (it)’) > Hom. τέφρη,
Att. τέφρᾱ;
∗ϝρήτρᾱ ‘(verbal) agreement’ (Elean ϝρᾱ́ τρᾱ DGE 409.1) > ∗ϝρήτρǣ > Hom.
acc. ῥήτρην Od. 14.393, Att. ῥήτρᾱ.
On the other hand, retraction immediately following a front vowel must have
occurred after intervocalic ∗ϝ was lost; note the following examples:
PIE fem. ∗néwah₂ ‘new’ (cf. Skt návā, Lat. nova) > PGk ∗νέϝᾱ ‘new (moon),
young’ > ∗νέϝǣ > Ion. νέη, Att. νέᾱ;
PIE ∗póywah₂ ‘meadow’ (cf. Lith. pı´eva) > PGk ∗ποίϝᾱ ‘grass’ > ∗ποίϝǣ > Ion.
ποίη, Att. ∗ποίᾱ > π´οᾱ;
PIE ∗wah₂g- ‘split’ vel sim. (cf. pres. 3sg. Hitt. wāki ‘(s)he bites’, Toch. B wokota¨r
‘it splits open’) in PGk ∗ϝέϝᾱγε ‘it’s broken’ (Lesbian ἔᾱγε, Sappho 31.9) >
∗ϝέϝǣγε > Ion. (∗)ἔηγε (ptc. nt. pl. κατεηγ´οτα, Herodotos 7.224.1), Att. κατ-
έᾱγε.
Inherited words exhibiting retraction after original front vowels are not as numer-
ous as those after ρ, but note the following:
PIE fem. gen. ∗syáh₂s ‘one’ (see 2.3.6 (i)) → ∗smiáh₂s > PGk ∗hμιᾶς > ∗hμιǣ͂ ς >
Ion. μιῆς, Att. μιᾶς;
PIE ∗sḱáh₂ih₂ ~ ∗sḱh₂iáh₂- ‘shadow, shade’ (Skt cʰāyā́ , Toch. B skiyo; see Ringe
1996: 18–20) >→ ∗σκιǣ́ > Hom., Ion. σκιή, Att. σκιᾱ́ .
‘Cheek’ also belongs here:
PGk ∗parawhā́ > ∗παρᾱϝᾱ́ > ∗παρǣϝǣ́ > ∗παρηϝǣ́ > ∗παρηǣ́ > Att. ∗παρηᾱ́ >
παρεᾱ́ .
Because the above pairwise orderings can be demonstrated, it is possible to posit
a unitary relative chronology (cf. Szemerényi 1968a: 1353, Gates 1976: 46):
1) fronting;
2) a) dissimilation,
b) loss of intervocalic ∗ϝ;
3) retraction (all environments);
4) loss of postconsonantal ∗ϝ.
Retraction could have been a single change, so far as the arguments adduced above
can tell us. Alternatively, the loss of ∗ϝ in all positions could have occurred at


===== PDF PAGE 316 =====
306 THE ATTIC-IONIC DIALECTS
the same time, in which case the chronology would have to be as follows (Gates
1976: 45):
1) fronting;
2) dissimilation;
3) retraction immediately following ρ;
4) loss of ∗ϝ;
5) retraction immediately following front vowels.
However, it is perhaps more likely that both retraction and the loss of ∗ϝ occurred
in two historical stages, in which case we have two relative chronologies that
diverge toward their ends:
1) fronting;
2) dissimilation;
3a) retraction following ρ; 3b) loss of intervocalic ∗ϝ;
4a) lost of postconsonantal ∗ϝ. 4b) retraction following front vowels.
To continue with this line of argument we need further evidence.
That evidence is provided by the contraction of ∗εα to ∗ǣ. Unfortunately that
was a messy sound change—for instance, it typically did not occur in disyllables
(Gates 1976: 47)—but it is at least clear that it preceded the loss of intervocalic ∗ϝ,
since in completely isolated forms like ἐννέα ‘nine’ loss of ∗ϝ was not followed by
contraction (Gates, loc. cit.). Thus our chronology must be:
1) fronting;
2) dissimilation;
3a) retraction following ρ; 3b) ∗εα > ∗ǣ;
4a) lost of postconsonantal ∗ϝ. 4b) loss of intervocalic ∗ϝ;
5b) retraction following front vowels.
We thus expect to find εh-stem masc.-fem. acc. sg. and neut. nom.-acc. pl. forms
in -ᾱ —and we do: the acc. sg. of ἀκλεής and εὐκλεής always ends in -κλεᾶ in Attic
inscriptions (Threatte 1996: 299), and though ὑγιῆ ‘sound’ is the normal form in
both categories in 4th-century Attic inscriptions, ὑγιᾶ also occurs (p. 298).⁶ Evi-
dently the ending of εh-stem adjectives without retraction has been leveled into
ὑγιῆ. Consequently we might suggest that acc. sg. πλήρη ‘full’, nom.-acc. μέρη
‘parts’, etc., are also the result of paradigmatic leveling (so Gates 1976: 49–50).
But the fact that there are no byforms in -ᾱ—literally none at all—should give us
pause; we will be truer to the facts if we argue that retraction immediately fol-
lowing ρ preceded the contraction ∗εα > ∗ǣ. We now have the following relative
chronology:
⁶ Note that acc. pl. ὑγιᾶς, cited by Gates (1976: 51), is apparently a false reading (Threatte 1996:
299).


===== PDF PAGE 317 =====
6.2 ATTIC AND IONIC SOUND CHANGES 307
1) fronting;
2) dissimilation;
3) retraction following ρ;
4a) lost of postconsonantal ∗ϝ. 4b) ∗εα > ∗ǣ;
5b) loss of intervocalic ∗ϝ;
6b) retraction following front vowels.
So it appears that retraction was not a single sound change (cf. Peters 1980: 303,
who also puts retraction following ρ early and retraction following front vowels
late);⁷ but in that case ∗ϝ could have been lost in all positions at more or less the
same time. That is more or less the conclusion of Samuels (2017: 97) as well.
An across-the-board merger of ∗ǣ with η eventually occurred throughout the
Attic-Ionic dialect area, and not necessarily at the same time in all the dialects.
Can we determine when it occurred in any relevant dialect? I observed above that
arguments based on relations between vowels in the vowel space are not cogent.
Unfortunately the same must be said of Tucker’s assumptions about Greek poets’
command of dialects (Tucker 1962: 491). Possibly some did simply attempt to
transpose, by rule, the forms of their own dialect into forms appropriate for other
dialects, but we must also reckon with the possibility that others were exceptional
language learners who were able to acquire unfamiliar dialects with near-native
fluency; a well-attested example of such a person is Joseph Wright, the famous
19th-century British philologist. For that reason we cannot assume that ∗ǣ was still
distinct simply because the Attic dramatists, for example, replaced it with Doric
ᾱ (mostly) correctly. It seems prudent to remain agnostic about exactly when ∗ǣ
merged with η across the board in any Attic-Ionic dialect.
One more striking sound change is characteristic of Attic-Ionic, and only of
that dialect group, namely quantitative metathesis (QM). Peters (1980: 303) and
Samuels (2017: 97) order it before retraction following front vowels, but in that
case the triggers for QM would have been not only a-vowels and o-vowels, but
also ∗ǣ in ‘cheek’ (i.e. ∗παρηǣ́ > ∗παρεǣ́ > Att. παρεᾱ́ ). It seems much more nat-
ural to order retraction first (thus ∗παρηǣ́ > Att. ∗παρηᾱ́ > παρεᾱ́ , as above), with
only back non-high vowels triggering QM. It would follow that in this word QM
did not apply in Ionic—and that might actually be true: in Homer the first two syl-
lables are always (nineteen times) spelled παρει- with an ει that can be a (graphic)
Atticism for η (pace Szemerényi 1967a: 64 fn. 68), and the only other early Ionic
example I can find is acc. pl. παρειᾱ́ ς at Herodotos 1.134.1. Hom. θηήσαο, θηητήρ,
etc. < ∗θǣϝǣ- (see Kretschmer 1892)—never θεη-—point in the same direction.⁸
If the above is true, QM can be stated as follows:
⁷ Peters’ chronology is much more elaborate, partly because he reckons with rule reordering. How-
ever, it is not clear that rule reordering, as opposed to rule changes of other kinds, can actually occur;
see Ringe and Eska (2013: 123–31) for discussion.
⁸ It would then follow that post-Homeric Ionic θέη, etc., reflect Attic influence.


===== PDF PAGE 318 =====
308 THE ATTIC-IONIC DIALECTS
∗ǣ or η followed by a non-high back vowel is shortened to ε, and the back vowel
is lengthened if it is not already long; further, lengthened ∗o > ω (not ō).
In some ways this is a puzzling sound change: it did not affect ε¯ (on which, see
further below), and it remains unclear why lengthened o should also have been
lowered. In any case it affected all the Attic-Ionic dialects at so late a date that
it must have spread through the dialect continuum. The Homeric text includes
many forms in which QM has not occurred, as well as others in which it has. Note
especially the following:
PIE pronominal gen. pl. ∗-ah₂soHom (Skt tā́ sām ‘of those (fem.)’, Lat. -ārum)
> PGk ∗-ᾱ́ hων (Hom. (Aiolic) τά̄ ων ‘of those’) > -ǣ́ ων (Naxian ἀλ(λ)ήōν
‘of (all) others’ DGE 758.2—see above) > -έων (Hom. πυλέων ‘(out) of the
gates’ Il. 7.1) > -ῶν;
PGk masc. ᾱ-stem gen. sg. ∗-ᾱjο (∗-ᾱhο?; see 4.3.5) > -ᾱο (preserved unchanged
in Boiotian, e.g. Θεδωρίδᾱο DGE 447.7, and in Hom. Aἰακίδᾱο, etc.) > -ǣo
(Naxian Δεινοδίκηο DGE 758.1–2—see above) > Ion. -εω;
PGk gen. ∗π´οληjος  ‘city’s’ > π´οληος  (preserved in Homer) > Att. π´ολεως;
PGk acc. sg. ∗γʷασιλῆϝα, pl. ∗γʷασιλῆϝας, gen. sg. ∗γʷασιλῆϝος,
pl. ∗γʷασιλήϝων > ∗βασιλῆϝα, ∗-ας, ∗-ος (Cyprian pa-si-le-wo-se; Masson
217.6), ∗βασιλήϝων > βασιλῆα, -ας, -ος, βασιλήων (all preserved in Homer)
> Att. βασιλέᾱ, βασιλέᾱς, βασιλέως, βασιλέων;
post-PIE gen. ∗nāwós ‘ship’s’ (Skt nāvás) > ∗νǣϝος > νη´ος (preserved in Homer)
> Att. νε ως;´
PGk ∗hjᾶϝος ‘for as long as, until’, ∗τᾶϝος ‘for so long’ (cf. Skt yā́ vat ‘as much
as’, tā́ vat ‘so much’) > ∗hæ͂̄ ϝος, ∗τǣ͂ ϝος > ∗ἧος, ∗τῆος > Ion., Att. ἕως, τέως;
post-PIE ∗h₂usṓs ‘dawn’ > ∗hawhṓs (see 3.5.1, 3.5.2) > PGk ∗ἁϝϝ ως´ (Lesb. αὔως)
> ᾱ̔ ϝ ´ως  (see 5.2) > Att.-Ion. ∗hǣ ως (Hom.´  ἠ ´ως  with psilosis) > Att. ∗ἑ ´ως →
ἕως;
pre-Gk ∗ναhϝος´ ‘dwelling’ > PGk ∗ναϝϝ´ος  ‘temple’ (Lesb. acc. να˜υον  Sappho
2.1) > ∗νᾱϝ´ος  > ∗νǣ´ος  (Hom. νη´ος) > Att.  νε ´ως;
PGk ∗λᾱϝος´ ‘body of troops’ (Hom. (Aiolic) λᾱ´ος)  > ∗λǣ´ος  ‘people’ > Att. λε ως.´
The ᾱ-stem endings and the adverbs show conclusively that QM occurred in all
Attic-Ionic dialects; such forms as gen. sg. βασιλέος, π´ολιος, etc., are the products
of leveling, not of regular sound change. The fact that numerous forms unaffected
by QM occur in Homer can be attributed to the formulaic nature of the poems, at
least in part; but it also suggests that QM was a comparatively late change, perhaps
as late as ca. 800 BC. It obviously followed the loss of ∗ϝ, another comparatively
recent change from the Homeric point of view.
I noted above that ε¯ did not participate in QM. Instead it was shortened before
vowels without further consequences. The clearest example is the aorist of ‘pour’:


===== PDF PAGE 319 =====
6.3 ATTIC-IONIC MORPHOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS 309
aor. ∗χέϝhαι ‘to pour’ > PGk ∗χέϝϝαι (Hom. Aiolic χε˜υαι)  > ∗χε˜ϝαι > ∗χε˜αι  > Att.
χέαι, cf. also Hom. 3pl. ἔχεαν.⁹
The same sound change affected ∗ō, to judge from a relatively isolated example:
∗ἀκουhᾱ́ ‘hearing’ > PGk ∗ἀκοϝϝά̄ (Lesb. pl. ἄκουαι Sappho 31.12) > ∗ἀκōϝᾱ́ >
∗ἀκōǣ́ > Ion., Att. ἀκοή.
Examples of this sound change are few simply because not many words were of
the right shape to be affected when it occurred. Like QM, it clearly followed the
loss of ∗ϝ.
At least one more distinctive sound change affected all the Attic-Ionic dialects,
namely the contraction of short α with following e-vowels. While the result was η
in West Greek and Boiotian (Buck 1955: 37),¹⁰ in Attic-Ionic it was ᾱ. Nearly all
the examples are furnished by forms of α-cοntract presents and similar futures, e.g.
pres. indic. 2sg. τῑμᾶις, 3sg. τῑμᾶι, 2pl. τῑμᾶτε (α+ε), and the homonymous subjunc-
tive forms (α+η). This too must have been a late change that spread through the
dialect continuum, given that uncontracted examples are very frequent in Homer.
Vowel contraction in general will be treated in 7.2.3, since it occurred to some
extent in all 1st-millennium BC dialects.
A final peculiarity of Attic is that /h-/ appears in various words apparently as a
reflex of ∗ϝ-; see Sturm (2018) for discussion and a possible solution.
6.3 Attic-Ionic morphological innovations
These were few, but at least one was far-reaching.
I noted in 5.4.2 that the innovative secondary 3pl. ending -αν spread to the
imperfect of ‘be’ in Attic-Ionic. The inherited 3sg. was ἦς, preserved in other
dialects and actually attested in half a dozen local West Greek dialects, literary
Doric (beginning with Alkman 16.1), Lesbian, Boiotian, Arkadian, and probably
Cyprian (Masson 1978); the new Attic-Ionic 3pl. was ἦσαν. This development
appears to have had two, or perhaps three, further consequences.
The most surprising consequence was the reinterpretation of the old 3pl. ἦεν <
PGk ∗ἦhεν < PIE ∗é h₁send (Skt ā́ san) as 3sg. That must have been the result of
native learners’ reinterpretation of the form in some specific syntactic context, but
⁹ See the older literature at Schwyzer (1939: 745), who wrongly rejects this explanation. Unfortu-
nately later scholars have mostly followed Schwyzer.
¹⁰ In Arkadian, Cyprian, Lesbian, and Pelasgiote Thessalian indisputable examples are hard to find,
because in those dialects contract verbs are inflected athematically (see 5.4.2); I can find no relevant
examples in the other Thessalian dialects.


===== PDF PAGE 320 =====
310 THE ATTIC-IONIC DIALECTS
the details are not recoverable; it seems reasonable to suggest that it was possible
because the new 3pl. ἦσαν was already being learned. In Homer this change is
already complete.
The most far-reaching consequence then followed: -σαν was extracted from
ἦσαν as a secondary 3pl. ending, since -σ- was no longer obviously part of the
root, and spread to other athematic stems in the Attic-Ionic dialects. In Homer this
change is not yet complete: we still find ἔβαν beside ἔβησαν, μίγεν beside μίγησαν,
and so on. However, it is complete among the commonest irregular verbs: we find
only ἴσαν ~ ἤϊσαν ‘they went’ and ἴσαν ‘they knew’. That is a good reason for sug-
gesting that the ending spread from ἦσαν; another is that spread from sigmatic
aorist -σαν—the traditional suggestion—is difficult to motivate, since the -σ- of
the latter is obviously a stem suffix. In later Attic-Ionic -σαν has ousted older -(ε)ν
in every athematic formation except the optative.
A possible third consequence was the creation of ‘movable -ν’. As is well known
to beginning students, a functionless -ν can optionally be attached to any 3sg. verb
form that ends in -ε and to any ending that ends in -σι (in effect, primary 3pl.
endings and dative plurals), as well as ἐστι. Since this too is restricted to Attic-
Ionic, it must have started from some specifically Attic-Ionic form, and the new
3sg. ἦεν is the only available candidate. The progression must have been ἦεν →
-ε ~ -εν → 3pl. -σι ~ -σιν → dat. pl. -σι ~ -σιν and ἐστι ~ ἐστιν. What is interest-
ing about this innovation is that it never got beyond the variable stage, yet it was
not suppressed either; that suggests that there was both a significant social rea-
son to adopt it and an equally significant social reason to reject it, resulting in a
variationist compromise.
So far as our evidence goes, all Attic-Ionic dialects participated in a change
affecting mediopassive perfect and pluperfect 3pl. forms. After stem-final conso-
nants the endings were -αται and -ατο (with α < ∗ n̥ ), and those were the only
vowel-initial endings; all the other endings in the paradigm began with σ, τ, σθ,
or μ. Since labial and velar stops assimilated to following obstruents, it must have
been difficult for native learners to guess the identity of an underlying stem-final
stop from infrequently heard forms. The result was that in the 3pl. etymological
π and β were replaced by φ, while κ and γ were replaced by χ. Homer provides
several examples, including τετράφατο ‘they kept facing’ Il. 10.189 (root τρεπ-)
and ὀρωρέχαται ‘(horses) are running flat-out’ Il. 16.834 (root ὀρεγ-). Posthomeric
examples include:
τετράφαται ‘they are inclined’ Theognis 42 (τρεπ-);
εἰλίχατο ‘they were wrapped’ Herodotos 7.90 (ἐλικ-);
τετρίφαται ‘they exhibit bruises’ Herodotos 2.93.3 (τρῑβ-);
τετάχαται ‘(ships) are drawn up’ Thoukydides 3.13.3, ἀντιτετάχαται ‘they are
deployed against’ Xenophon Anabasis 4.8.5 (ταγ-).


===== PDF PAGE 321 =====
6.3 ATTIC-IONIC MORPHOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS 311
Unfortunately I can find no epigraphical examples. This change gave rise to diver-
gent developments in the Attic and East Ionic dialects; see Ringe (2016) for further
discussion.
A final innovation common to all of Attic-Ionic is completely unrelated to the
above. The inherited forms of the 1pl. and 2pl. pronouns were the (PIE stressed)
accusatives (see 2.3.6 (iii), 3.5.2, 4.3.6); all the dialects built whole paradigms
around them, but the Attic-Ionic nom. and acc. forms were distinctive:
PIE ∗ n̥ smé ‘us’ > ∗hąhmé > ∗ἁμμέ (Hom. (Aiolic) ἄμμε) > ἁ̄ μέ (preserved in
Doric) > ∗ἡμέ → ἡμέας, whence nom. ἡμέες (Att. >→ ἡμᾶς, > ἡμε˜ς);
PIE ∗usmé ‘you (acc. pl.)’ > ∗huhmé > ∗ὑμμέ (Lesb. ὔμμε Alkaios 309) > ῡ̔ μέ
(preserved in Doric) → ῡ̔ μέας, whence nom. ὑ̄ μέες (Att. >→ ὑ̄ μᾶς, > ὑ̄ με˜ς).
The other dialects preserve the accusative forms unaltered and simply add -ς to
form the nominative, so far as forms are attested (naturally they hardly ever occur
in inscriptions).
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0006


===== PDF PAGE 322 =====
7
Widely shared later innovations
7.1 Introduction
Each of the attested Greek dialects exhibits numerous distinctive innovations.
Those that might have occurred early and can reasonably be adduced as evidence
to classify the dialects have been discussed in the preceding two chapters. Many
of the remaining innovations are confined to single dialects. Some, however, are
shared by various dialects in patterns that cut across the older dialect groups. They
are the subject of this chapter.
7.2 Later sound changes
7.2.1 νσ-clusters
All the dialects inherited many examples of the sequence νσ, but the sources of
that sequence were not the same in all dialects. The PGk accusative plural forms
of vowel stems originally ended in -νς (see 2.3.4 (i)), and in all dialects original ∗nty
and ∗nts became νσ (see 3.6.3, 3.7); in addition, the ordinals of the decads must
have ended in ∗-κονστ´ος (derived from -κοντα). But the South Greek dialects had
also evolved new sequences -νσι < ∗-ντι (see 5.3.1), and some dialects had created
a new preposition ἐνς ‘into’ (see 5.4.2).
One change affecting these clusters probably occurred in all the dialects: when
νσ occurred immediately before a consonant, ν was lost. Since ἐνς was affected
(see below), it is likely that this was a comparatively late sound change that spread
through the dialect continuum. Relatively isolated words exhibit its effects:
∗κενστος´ ‘embroidered’ (cf. κεντε˜ν  ‘to prick; to embroider’) > Hom. κεστ´ος;
∗κ´ονσμος  ‘pricked pattern, decoration, adornment’ > κ´οσμος  ‘adornment;
order’; Cret. acc. κ´οσμον ‘magistrate(s)’ DGE 177.11–12 with derived verb
κοσμέν ‘hold public office’ in pres. ptc. gen. κοσμίοντος DGE 179.I.51–2;
Lesb. κεκ´οσμηται ‘has been decorated’ Alkaios 140.2.
So do the ordinals of the decads, which end in -κοστ´ος in most dialects. In Lesbian
we instead find -κοιστος (e.g. fem. dat. sg. εἰκοίστᾱι ‘20th’ DGE 620.39), which
might suggest that the loss of ν in this position never occurred in Lesbian; but in
that case κ´οσμος would have to be a loanword. It seems more likely that -ν- was


===== PDF PAGE 323 =====
7.2 L ATER SOUND CHANGES 313
reintroduced into the ordinals from -κοντα at some point before the distinctive
Lesbian development of νσ (see below). In Attic the loss of ν in συν- before the
clusters -στ- and -ζ- (i.e. -σδ-) remains a productive rule (συστέλλε˜ν, συζευγνύναι,
etc.).
When -νς was word-final its ν should have been lost when the next word within
the phrase began with a consonant but should have survived when the next word
within the phrase began with a vowel, as well as phrase-finally. In the 5th-century
Cretan law code from Gortyn the accusative plural forms of the article still exhibit
that distribution to some extent,¹ e.g.:
τὸς κᾱδεστὰνς καὶ τὸς μαίτυρανς ‘the in-laws and the witnesses’ DGE 179.
III.50–1;
τὸς μὲν υἰύνς ‘the sons’ IV.39–40;
τὰδ δὲ θυγατέρανς ‘the daughters’ IV.41–2; but
τὰνς ἐν π´ολῑ ‘those (houses) in the city’ IV.32;
τὸνς ἐλεύθερονς ‘the free (children)’ VII.7–8;
τὸνσς ἐπιβάλλοντανς ‘those next in line (for an inheritance)’ VII.9–10.
Otherwise forms in -νς have largely been generalized—further examples will be
cited below—but there is still some variation: we read τουτος˜  ἔκεν τὰ κρε ̄́ματα
‘they are to have the possessions’ three times early in the fifth column, followed by
τουτονς˜  ἔκεν τὰ κρε ̄́ματα at V.27–8.
Other dialects have leveled these outcomes in one direction or the other. We
find only accusative plurals in -ος and -ας in Arkadian, Thessalian, and the Doric
of Thera—hence also in Kyrenaian, a colony of the latter:
Ark. hεκοτὸν δαρχμάς DGE 654.4, τὰς ὕστερας τρὶς ᾱ̓ μέρας 654.8–9, τὸς
τριᾱκάσιος 654.20–1, τὸς ἔσγονος 657.54;
Thess. τὸς ταγος´ DGE 590.3, τὰς ἐπιστολάς 590.43;
Theran τὸς ἀνδριάντας DGE 227.B.12;
Kyrenaian ἔς τε τὸς κοινὸς εὐεργ[έτας] Ῥωμαῖος καὶ ἐς τᾱ̀ ν π´ολιν καὶ [ἐς] τὸς
ἱαρές DGE 236.4–6; πάς ‘all’ Buck 115.39; acc. τρίς Buck 115.113.
As the Kyrenaian examples show, the same outcome was generalized in other
instances of final -νς; for instance, in Arkadian the athematic participles
hιεροθυτές ‘(what he declares) as hιεροθύτᾱς’ DGE 654.4 and ἐργ ωνησας´ ‘hav-
ing contracted’ DGE 656.12 likewise lack -ν-. Other dialects generalized ∗-νς
(occasionally with lexical exceptions, e.g. Ionic ἐς).
No further change affected νσ in Cretan, West Argolic (Bartoněk 1971: 119–20),
Arkadian, or Thessalian. Typical examples include:
¹ However, some phrase-final -ανς have been remodeled from consonant-stem -ας (cf. μαίτυρανς,
θυγατέρανς, ἐπιβάλλοντανς); that is, the ᾱ-stem alternation -ανς ~ -ας has been extended to consonant-
stem -ας, especially at phrase-end.


===== PDF PAGE 324 =====
314 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
Cret. μαίτυρανς παρέ̄ με¯ν δρομέανς ἐλεύθερονς τρίινς ἐ̄̀ πλίανς² ‘three or
more free witnesses of age shall be present’ DGE 179.V.52–4, ἐ̄̀
καταθὲνς ἐ̄̀ ἐπίσπενσανς ‘having either mortgaged or promised (it)’
VI.19–20;
West Argolic ἐνς πολιν´ DGE 83.A.4, ἅ[π]ανσαν B.5–6, τὸνς ϝεξε̄́ κοντα τέλεονς
ὄϝινς B.10, τοῖς θῡ́ ονσι B.16;
Ark. subj. 3pl. κελεύωνσι DGE 656.15, fem. dat. sg. ἐσδοθένσᾱι ‘married off ’
657.7, τοῖς πρ´οτερον οἴκοι πολῑτεύονσι ‘for those who were previously
citizens at home’ 657.21; fem. acc. pl. πάνσας 665.A.11;
Thess. fem. dat. sg. πάνσᾱ DGE 567.2.
These were clearly ‘relic’ areas (see immediately below).
Perhaps the most widely shared sound change that cannot be used to define
dialect groups is the ‘second compensatory lengthening’ (2CL). The change is
simply stated: in a sequence ∗Vνσ, the ν was lost and the preceding vowel was
lengthened. This change must have spread through the dialect continuum—
including the Attic-Ionic dialect continuum, since it followed the fronting of
inherited ∗ᾱ which all Attic-Ionic dialects shared. It failed to reach the areas noted
in the preceding paragraph, as well as Lesbian, Theran (and Kyrenaian), and in
part Elean, which will be discussed below. Mid vowels lengthened by the 2CL
usually became ε¯ and ō in those dialects in which they are distinguished from
inherited η and ω. I give Attic examples; other dialects have similar forms (to the
extent that they also inherited a form with νσ, see above) except that in a few we
find η, ω instead of ε¯, ō:
PGk ∗ἐhεντι ‘they are’ (Doric ἐντι) > (∗)ἐhενσι (Myc. e-e-si) > ε̄̓ σι;
PGk ∗φέροντι ‘they carry’ (preserved in Doric) > ∗φέρονσι > φέρōσι;
PGk pf. 3pl. ∗-ąτι > -ατι (e.g. in Aitolian γεγ´ονατι IG IX-1².171.6) > -ασι (e.g.
in Ark. ἐσλελοίπασι ‘they have missed’ DGE 657.22) → ∗-ανσι > -ᾱσι, e.g. in
δεδίᾱσι ‘they are afraid’;
PGk acc. pl. ∗-ονς, ∗-ανς (preserved in four dialects, see above) > -ōς, -ᾱς;
PGk ∗πάντς ‘all’, dat. pl. ∗πάντσι, fem. ∗πάντjα > ∗πάνς, ∗πάνσι, πάνσα (the last
attested in Arkadian and Thessalian, see above) > πᾶς, πᾶσι, πᾶσα;
PGk aor. ptc. ∗θέντς ‘upon putting’, dat. pl. ∗θέντσι, fem. ∗θέντjα > ∗θένς, ∗θένσι,
∗θένσα > θε̄́ ς, θε˜σι, θε˜σα;
PGk pres. ptc. dat. pl. ∗-οντσι, fem. ∗-οντjα > -ονσι (cf. Ark. πολῑτεύονσι, see
above), -ονσα (cf. Ark. pl. μίνονσαι ‘remaining’ DGE 657.49–50) > -ōσι,
-ōσα, and so all other active and aorist passive participles and other ντ-stem
nominals;
finally, ∗ἐνς ‘into’ > ε̄̓ ς.
² Three of the examples in this passage have been remodeled from consonant-stem -ας (and ‘three’
has been remodeled from ∗τρίνς), but the point is that -νς survived unchanged (and so was available
as a model).


===== PDF PAGE 325 =====
7.2 L ATER SOUND CHANGES 315
In addition to the dialects in which ∗νσ underwent no change, there are some
that underwent a different development of that cluster. In Lesbian and Kyrenaian
(so also presumably in Theran³) ∗Vνσ > Vισ. This outcome is copiously attested
in Lesbian poetry; among the dozens of examples in Sappho the following are
typical:
acc. pl. σατίναις ὐπ’ ἐϋτρ´οχοις  ἆγον αἰμι´ονοις  ‘to the well-running carriages
they hitched the mules’ Sappho 44.13–14;
3pl. ἀπυκρύπτοισι ‘they hide away’ 34.2, φαῖσ(ι) ‘they say’ 16.2, ἐπιρρ´ομβεισ(ι)
‘(my ears) ring’ 31.11–12;
fem. ptc. pres. ἐθέλοισα 1.24, aor. λίποισα 1.7, ὐπασδεύξαισα ‘having yoked’ 1.9,
pass. ἐπιμνᾱ́ σθεισ(α) ‘upon being reminded’ 96.15–16;
παῖς ‘all’ 2.6, fem. acc. παῖσαν 31.14;
εἶς ‘one’ 5.8;
εἰς ‘into’ 56.2.
Kyrenaian examples are few, partly because in that dialect -ς was generalized at the
expense of ∗-νς word-finally (see above), but the following can be cited:
fem. ptc. pres. acc. ἀνήκοισαν ‘promoting, conducive to’ DGE 237.12, pf. dat.
pl. προγεγονοίσαις 237.20, aor. nom. sg. καθᾱ́ ραισα Buck 115.87;
fem. ἑκοῖσα ‘willing’ Buck 115.89.
Only Elean exhibits three different outcomes of this cluster. Word-internally the
2CL seems to have applied, cf.:
pres. ptc. fem. δικά(δ)δōσα DGE 412.4, ἀνταποδιδῶσσα 425.17;
fem. acc. πᾶσαν 425.12.
Word-finally there are some early examples of acc. pl. -ος and -ας:
ἐλεύθαρος DGE 416.3, ἰαρ´ος 416.4, κα(τ)θυτάς ‘dedicated’ 418.6, 12,
as well as the defective
(πε)ν(τ)ακάτιας κα δαρχμ(ά)ς DGE 411.2–3.
But -αις is also attested early:
³ I cannot find the Theran παῖσα cited in Buck (1955: 67). Bechtel (1923: 529) cites a fragmen-
tary -ωσα that might reflect the 2CL. Most of the epigraphical material is late and largely in the Attic
koine.


===== PDF PAGE 326 =====
316 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
ζέκα μναίς κα … κα(τ)θυταίς DGE 409.3–4,] μναίς κ’ ἀποτίνο[ι κα](τ)θυταίς
410.4.
In later inscriptions, after word-final rhotacism had occurred, we find -οιρ and
-αιρ:
ταὶρ δὲ γενεαίρ ‘the descendants’ DGE 424.1, τοὶρ δὲ ἐπ’ ἀ̄́ (σ)σιστα ‘the next of
kin’ 424.8–9, καὶ ἄλλοιρ καὶ πλείονερ ‘and many others’ 425.7–8,
the last with the Northwest Greek or later Attic koine replacement of acc. pl. -ας
by -ες. Apparently the outcomes -Vς and ∗-Vνς were still in competition in prehis-
toric Elean, somewhat as in Cretan; but it is surprising that the 2CL occurred only
word-internally.
7.2.2 Loss of ∗ϝ
In 6.2 we had occasion to discuss the interaction of the loss of ∗ϝ and other sound
changes in Attic. ∗ϝ was also lost in most other dialects, often considerably later
than in Attic; only in Ionic and in insular Doric (not including Cretan) does the
consonant seem to have been lost before the earliest inscriptions. Homeric verse
often behaves as if ∗ϝ were still in place, but in more than a few instances it is
ignored, which demonstrates that it had already been lost in the poet’s (or poets’)
speech in the 8th century. It was still in place word-initially in the verse of Sappho
and Alkaios. The best brief discussion is perhaps still Buck 1955: 46–52.
In most phonotactic circumstances loss of ∗ϝ had no consequences, except that
it occurred late enough to impede contraction of vowels (see 7.2.3) and a few other
changes of vowels in hiatus. However, loss of ∗ϝ immediately following a conso-
nant triggered lengthening of the vowel preceding the consonant in West Argolic
(Bartoněk 1971: 120), Cretan, insular Doric, and East Ionic; also in the Ionic of
Thasos, to judge from names (cf. Bechtel 1924: 72).⁴ This is called the ‘third com-
pensatory lengthening’ (3CL); in other dialects, including Attic and Lesbian, it did
not occur. Its geographical distribution creates a strong presumption that it spread
through the dialect continuum. Unsurprisingly, the 3CL of ∗α in Ionic yields ᾱ (not
η). Examples are guaranteed variously by the scansion of metrical texts and by the
orthography of some inscriptions. In the following examples, mostly from literary
Greek, ει = ε¯ and ου = ō; ‘Ionic’ without further qualification is literary Ionic:
ϝίσϝος ‘equal’ (attested in Boiotian, Arkadian, and Cretan) > Hom., Ion. ἶσος;
Att., Lesb. ἴσος;
⁴ Examples from other Ionic-speaking islands are in hexameter verse and can be Homericizing.


===== PDF PAGE 327 =====
7.2 L ATER SOUND CHANGES 317
καλϝος´ ‘beautiful’ (Boiot. neut. καλϝ´ον  DGE 538.1) > Hom., Ion. κᾱλ´ος;  Att.
καλ´ος, Lesb. κάλος;
δερϝᾱ ‘neck’ (accent?; Ark. acc. δερϝᾱν DGE 664.14) > Hom., Ion. δειρή; Att.
δέρη, Lesb. δέρᾱ;
κ´ορϝᾱ  ‘girl’ (Myc. ko-wa, Ark. dat. K´ορϝᾱι  DGE 676(1)) > Hom., Ion. κούρη,
Knidian dat. sg. Kούρᾱι DGE 262.1; Att. κ´ορη,  Lesb. κ´ορᾱ;
(∗)κ´ορϝος  ‘boy’ (Myc. ko-wo) > Hom. κο˜υρος;
(∗)ξένϝος ‘guest, host’ (cpd. πρ´οξενϝος ‘official host’ attested in Korkyraian;
Corinthian Ξένϝōν DGE 121(2) prob. = Myc. ke-se-nu-wo, Aura Jorro 1999
s.v.) > Hom., Ion. ξεῖνος, cf. Cret. acc. pl. πρ´οξηνονς DGE 187.6–7; Att.
ξένος;
∗ϝ´ορϝος ‘boundary’ (probably, cf. Myc. wo-wo; Korkyraian ὄρϝος DGE 135(2),
cf. Ark. acc. εὐθυορϝίᾱν ‘in a straight line’ 664.14) > Hom., Ion. οὖρος,
Theran pl. οὖροι DGE 221.1, Cret. ὦρος 206g, West Argolic ῏ορος 83.B.6; Att.
ὅρος, Heraklean acc. pl. ὄρως DGE 62.53;
(∗)φάρϝος ‘length of cloth’ (Myc. pl. pa-we-a₂) > Hom. φᾶρος, Ion. pl. φᾱ́ ρε(α)
Xenophanes 3.3; Att. φάρος;
∗ἀρϝᾱ́ ‘prayer, imprecation’ (cf. Ark. κάταρϝον ‘under the curse’) > Hom. ἀ̄ ρή;
Att. ἀρᾱ́ (see 6.2 with fn. 5), Lesb. gen. sg. ἄρᾱς Sappho 86.5;
∗h´ολϝος ‘whole’ (cf. Skt sárvas) > Hom., Ion. οὖλος; Att. ὅλος;
∗πέρϝąτα ‘limits’ (cf. Skt párus ‘joint’) > Hom., Ion. πείρατα; Att. πέρατα, Lesb.
gen. pl. περάτων Alkaios 350.1;
∗ἔνϝąτος ‘ninth’ (∗ἐνέϝą ‘nine’, cf. Skt náva, Lat. novem) > Hom. εἴνατος, Kyre-
naian fem. acc. sg. ἠνάτᾱν Buck 115.102, West Argolic dat. sg. ἠνάτᾱι DGE
91.3; Att. ἔνατος;
∗μ´ονϝος  ‘alone’ > Hom., Ion. μο˜υνος;  Att. μ´ονος,  Lesb. fem. μ´ονᾱ  Sappho
168B.4;
∗ν´οσϝος  ‘disease’ > Hom., Ion. νο˜υσος;  Att. ν´οσος;
∗ὀδϝ´ος  ‘threshold’ > Hom. οὐδ´ος,  Kyrenaian dat. ὠδῶι Buck 115.134; Att. ὀδ´ος,
East Argolic acc. pl. τṑς ὀδṓς DGE 108g 1.49;
pres. ∗κʷινϝε/ο- ‘pay’ (cf. Hom. 3sg. τείνυται, Chantraine 1973: 303 with ref.)
> Hom. τῑ́νειν; Att. τίνε¯ν;
pres. ∗χʷθινϝε/ο- ‘wane’ (cf. Skt caus. kṣiṇóti) > Hom. φθῑ́νειν; Att. φθίνε¯ν;
pf. ∗δέδϝοικε ‘(s)he’s afraid’ (cf. Skt dvéṣas ‘hatred’) > Hom. δείδοικε; Att.
δέδοικε;
pres. ∗φθανϝε/ο- ‘do first’ > Hom. φθᾱ́ νειν, Att. φθάνε¯ν.


===== PDF PAGE 328 =====
318 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
7.2.3 Loss of intervocalic ∗h and ∗j; contractions
of vowels in hiatus
Since intervocalic ∗h and ∗j are still (sometimes) written on the Linear B tablets,
it is clear that their loss was a post-Mycenaean change; yet it affected all dialects
without exception and without irregularities, so far as we can tell. A large number
of hiatuses between vowels resulted.
Vowels in hiatus underwent contraction to some extent in all dialects, but the
details are somewhat different in each. The most complete presentation of the
facts in detail for individual dialects is still the relevant sections of Bechtel 1921,
1923, 1924, while a good summary is Buck 1955: 37–43. Like the latter, this section
does not aim at completeness; I will try to give a reasoned overview of the more
important developments.
Vowel contraction appears to have been a series of changes that continued over
many generations, no doubt with considerable variation at any given time. The
following general principles apply (see also Buck 1955: 43).
1) Because intervocalic ∗ϝ was lost centuries later than ∗h and ∗j, a much greater
number of vowel sequences originally separated by ∗ϝ remain uncontracted,
even in Attic-Ionic. Sometimes it can be shown that older hiatuses under-
went contraction before the loss of ∗ϝ; as noted in 6.2, the acc. sg. of ἀκλεής
and εὐκλεής always ends in -κλεᾶ in Attic inscriptions (Threatte 1996: 299),
so that the development must have been ∗-κλεϝέα > ∗-κλεϝǣ͂ > ∗-κλεæ͂̄ >
-κλεᾶ.
2) Identical vowels contracted much more readily than unlike vowels. That
applies even to hiatuses created by the loss of ∗ϝ; for instance, pres. inf.
∗πλέϝεhεν > ∗πλέϝε¯ν > ∗πλέε¯ν > πλε˜ν ‘to be sailing’ in Attic, but 1sg. ∗πλέϝω
> πλέω remains uncontracted.
3) Disyllables often remained uncontracted while longer words underwent
contraction. That applies even to the older hiatuses; for instance, θεος´ ‘god’
< ∗θεhος´ (cf. θέσφατος ‘god-spoken’) is normally disyllabic, but in names
like Att. Θōκῡδίδης it does contract.
Leaving aside archaisms in Homer, the dialect that contracted least appears to
be Boiotian. In the late 3rd-century inscription detailing the financial dealings
between Nikareta and the city of Orkhomenos (DGE 523) we find, e.g., gen. sg.
Πολυκράτιος (<-εος), τῶ ταμίᾱο ‘of the comptroller’, gen. pl. τᾶν ὑπερᾱμεριᾱ́ ων
τᾶν ἰωσᾱ́ ων ‘of the existing payments due’, aor. subj. ἀποδ ωει´ ‘pays’, perf. ptc. οὗτα
ϝεϝῡκονομει´οντων ‘having handled these transactions’, all with hiatuses of types
that contract in at least some other dialects. The sequence least liable to contraction
is εο, which contracts to ō only in Attic; εα and οᾱ are also relatively resistant: the
former contracts to η in Attic-Ionic and some other dialects (in no obvious pattern)


===== PDF PAGE 329 =====
7.2 L ATER SOUND CHANGES 319
but remains uncontracted in others (Buck 1955: 39), while the latter normally
contracts to ω only in Ionic (p. 42). Short α typically contracts with o or ω to
ω, but the contractions of long ᾱ with o-vowels are more variable; in Attic-Ionic
ᾱ was fronted to η and then underwent QM (see 6.2), sometimes with further
contraction to ω, but in most dialects the contraction product is ᾱ (Buck 1955:
37–8). Otherwise contraction with o-vowels usually yields an o-vowel. The most
striking widespread difference involves the contraction of (short) αε̄̆ and αη: as
observed in 6.2, these sequences yield ᾱ in Attic-Ionic but η in West Greek and
Boiotian, e.g.:
Rhodian θοινῆται ‘is consumed at a (sacred) feast’ DGE 286(1).5 = Att.-Ion.
θοινᾶται < ∗θοινάjεται;
Knidian subj. ἐπερωτῆι ‘he inquires’ DGE 263.49 = Att.-Ion. ἐπερωτᾶι <
∗ἐπερωτάjηι;
Cretan νῑκήθθō ‘let him be convicted’ DGE 181.15 = Att.-Ion. νῑκά̄ σθω <
∗νῑκαjέσθω;
West Argolic νῑκῆν ‘to be the victors’ DGE 85.13 = Att.-Ion. νῑκᾶν < ∗νῑκάjεhεν;
Lakonian hορῆν ‘to see’ DGE 16.4 = Att.-Ion. ὁρᾶν < ∗hοράjεhεν;
East Argolic [ὁ]ρῆι ‘she sees’ DGE 109.2 = Att.-Ion. ὁρᾶι < ∗hοράjει;
Megarian τῑμῆ ‘it honors’ DGE 154.17 = Att.-Ion. τῑμᾶι < ∗τῑμάjει;
Phokian σῡ]λῆν ‘to plunder’ IG IX-1.120.9–10 = Att.-Ion. σῡλᾶν < ∗σῡλάjεhεν.
In alphabets with only five vowels this η is of course written with epsilon; for
instance, ἐνɩ̄́κε¯ ‘he was victorious’ appears repeatedly in DGE 12, an early Lako-
nian inscription, and in DGE 363.2, an early Lokrian inscription, the last form
listed is written σῡλε˜ν. In Boiotian all long e-vowels merged in a higher mid vowel
eventually spelled ει; thus corresponding to the last infinitive adduced above we
find Boiotian σουλεῖμεν (de Ridder 1895: 157, 2nd inscription, line 7). Few forms
with η appear in literary Greek because the Doric of choral lyric mostly uses the
Attic-Ionic forms with ᾱ, but at least we can cite ὁρῆις ‘you see’ Alkman 1.50, νɩ̄́ κη
‘he won’ Pindar Nemean V.5, and perhaps τί δ’ ἐνɩ̄́ κης ‘what victory did you win?’
from Simonides’ thirty-first epigram, if Bergk’s emendation is correct.
7.2.4 Long mid vowels
The long vowels that Greek inherited from PIE and which resulted from the loss
of laryngeals (see 3.2.1, 3.2.3) appear in Greek as η, ᾱ, and ω. But there were also
‘secondary’ long mid vowels that reflect four sound changes:
1) the first compensatory lengthening, except in Lesbian and Thessalian
(see 5.2);


===== PDF PAGE 330 =====
320 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
2) the second compensatory lengthening, except in Lesbian, Thessalian, Arka-
dian, West Argolic, Cretan, Theran, and Kyrenaian (see 7.2.1);
3) the third compensatory lengthening in West Argolic, Cretan, insular Doric,
and East Ionic (see 7.2.2);
4) contraction of ε+ε and of o+o (also often of ο+ε; in Attic, also of ε+ο).
These new long mid vowels appear as ε¯ and ō, distinct from η and ω, in the West
Greek dialects spoken north of the Gulf of Corinth, in Megarian, Isthmian, and
East Argolic (Bartoněk 1971: 119), and in the whole Attic-Ionic subgroup. They
clearly merge with η and ω in Lesbian, Thessalian, Boiotian, Arkadian, Elean,
Lakonian, Heraklean, and Epizephyrian Lokrian; the merger products are spelled
differently in Thessalian (ει, ου) and Boiotian (ει, ω), but it is the merger that is
structurally important. In several dialects, namely West Argolic (Bartoněk 1971
loc. cit.), Cretan, and insular Doric, the situation is more complicated. Of course
the merger can be detected only in documents in which the Ionic vowel letters
η and ω (or the Attic spellings ει and ου) are used, and from some dialects the
evidence is insufficient in any case. For the facts in detail, see Bartoněk (1966: 48–
109); Buck (1955: 28–30) gives a useful summary. Ruijgh (2007) discusses in great
detail the pattern of outcomes and the changes that gave rise to it (see especially
pp. 402–6 on the latter). Here I will briefly exemplify the merger, then consider
how it came about.
In Lesbian and Thessalian the only source of the secondary long vowels is con-
traction; in Arkadian the 1CL is also a source. Pelasgiote Thessalian examples are
hard to find, especially because contract verbs are inflected athematically, the the-
matic infinitive ends in -έμεν, and the o-stem gen. sg. ends in -οι (< -οιο); for
examples in the interior of words, in personal names and designations of offices,
see Bechtel (1921: 144). The merger with the inherited long vowels in the other
dialects listed in this paragraph is exemplified by the following:
Lesb. inf. ἄγην Sappho 1.19, ἴδην 16.18 < ∗-εhεν, π´οησθαι 5.9 < ∗ποιϝέjεσθαι,
κῆν(ο) ‘that’ < ∗ἐκέjενο (cf. Att. ἐκεῖ ‘there’), cf. inherited ἦλθες 1.8, φιλήσει
1.23, κασί]γνητον 5.2;
similarly gen. μέσσω Sappho 1.12, προσ ωπω´ 16.18 < ∗-oho < PIE ∗-osyo (see
3.6.3), cf. inherited ὤκεες 1.10, subj. 1sg. πείθω 1.18, δῶρα, δ ωσει´ 1.22 (as
well as the second vowel of προσ ωπω);´
Thessaliote Thess. ἔχειν DGE 567.4, cf. inherited ibid. ἑξείκοντα, gen. εἱβᾱτᾶ;
similarly gen. το˜υ 567.3, 4, cf. inherited ἔδουκε 567.2;
Ark. φθήρων DGE 656.17 < ∗φθέρjων (see 5.2), φέρην 665.A.17, λαχῆν A.3, cf.
inherited ϝρήσῑ A.15, ἦς 656.37;
similarly acc. pl. δ[ι]αβωλευσάμινος DGE 665.A.25–6 (cf. Lesb. β´ολλᾱ and see
5.2), gen. τῶ ἔργω 656.14, cf. inherited ὤμοσαν 665.C.2, τῶν ἔργων 656.7.


===== PDF PAGE 331 =====
7.2 L ATER SOUND CHANGES 321
In Boiotian, Elean, Lakonian, and Heraklean the 2CL is also a source of these
vowels. Examples include:
Boiot. εἶμεν ‘to be’ DGE 462.A.3 < ∗ἔhμεν, fem. acc. ἡρεθεῖσαν ‘chosen’ A.13 <
∗-θένσαν, fut. inf. ἐσσεῖμεν A.18 < ∗-σεhέμεν, cf. inherited gen. μεινος´
‘month’ A.1, aor. pass. subj. κουρωθείει A.11 (uncontracted, ∗-θη- + ∗-ηι);
similarly προβεβωλευμένον DGE 462.A.3, acc. pl. εὐχομένως A.8, gen. τῶ τρίτω
A.1, cf. inherited gen. pl. ϝετίων ‘of years’ A.12;
Elean ἦμεν ‘to be’ DGE 424.7, dat. δηλ´ομενοι ‘wishing’ 424.6–7, πάσχην 424.13,
cf. inherited θηλυτέρᾱν 424.2–3;
similarly fem. ἀνταποδιδῶσσα ‘repaying’ DGE 425.17, δᾱμοσιῶμεν ‘to confis-
cate’ 424.3, cf. inherited φευγέτω 424.4;
Lakonian ἦμε[ν DGE 53.2, cf. inherited ἀνέσηκε ‘dedicated’ 54.2;
similarly acc. pl. προξένως DGE 53.2, gen. τῶ πατρος´ 54.3, cf. inherited
γεροντεύων ‘while a member of the gerousia’ 54.2;
Heraklean ἦμεν DGE 62.75–6, aor. pass. καταλῡμακωθής ‘covered with stones’
62.56–7 < ∗-θένς, fut. ἐγδικαξῆται ‘he shall exact the penalty’ 62.129–30 <
∗-σέhεται, cf. inherited hημίσχοινον ‘half a rod’ 62.20, συνθήκᾱ 62.94;
similarly acc. pl. τὼς χ ωρως,´  gen. τῶ Διονύσω 62.8, cf. inherited hοκτ ω´  ‘eight’
62.34.
There are two ways in which this merger could have happened. The original
lengthening and contraction products in all dialects might have been ε¯ and ō,
which subsequently merged with η and ω in the dialects in question; alternatively,
the lengthening and contraction products in those dialects might have been η and
ω from the start. The fact that the merged dialects constitute two large continuous
blocks which cut across older dialect boundaries⁵ suggests that the merger spread
through the dialect continuum, which further suggests the first scenario. The West
Argolic, Cretan, insular Doric, and Epizephyrian Lokrian data are also relevant, as
follows.
The Cretan data are especially instructive (Ruijgh 2007: 404). Not all Cretan
inscriptions use the letter η, but among those that do, the earliest exhibit an inter-
esting pattern of usage (Buck 1955: 29): η is used for the long vowel inherited
from Proto-Greek and for the result of the first compensatory lengthening, but the
long vowel resulting from the third compensatory lengthening is written ε¯, and the
result of contraction is also often written ε¯. Buck 116, from the 6th century, is an
example. We find inherited η in μή, aor. subj. κοσμήσει (etc.), and ἄκρηστον ‘with-
out official position’ (κ for χ, as often on Crete); we also find η from the 1CL in the
present infinitives ὀπῆλεν ‘to owe’ (see 5.2; π for φ) and ἤμε¯ν ‘to be’. However, in
⁵ That is true even of the Aiolic dialects, since Boiotian underwent the first compensatory lengthen-
ing while Thessalian and Lesbian did not.


===== PDF PAGE 332 =====
322 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
the only clear instance of contraction, the present infinitive κοσμε˜ν, the long vowel
is written ε¯. The distribution is not perfect; we also find inherited η written ε¯ in the
optatives δικακσίε¯⁶ and κοσμησίε¯, and beside ἤμε¯ν, whose ending was evidently
influenced by the thematic infinitive ending before the latter was reduced to -εν,
we also find ἤμην. Possibly ∗η was raised after ι and/or word-finally; more likely
the merger was already in progress, so that there was substantial variation. But it
does appear that the long mid front vowel which arose latest was at first ε¯, which
only later merged with η, the spelling used in most Cretan inscriptions. Of course
it does not follow that the same thing must have happened in other dialects, but
the Cretan data increase the plausibility of such a scenario.
The other Doric islands exhibit inconsistent outcomes of the various lengthen-
ings, and it is not always easy to interpret them historically; see Buck (1955: 29)
for a summary of the facts. However, Ruijgh (2007: 403–4) observes that, while
Kyrenaian usually exhibits η and ω for the secondary mid vowels, a 5th-century
inscription (SEG 9.45) listing names includes (gen. sg.) Bωλαγ´ορᾱ (l. 26), showing
that the 1CL yielded lower mid vowels, but numerous o-stem gen. sg. forms in -ō
(e.g. Kαλλιμάχō l. 9, Λύκō l. 42), showing that contraction at first yielded higher
mid vowels. Thus the development of Kyrenaian must have been similar to that of
Cretan.
Buck’s summary of the Argolic situation (loc. cit.) has been made obsolete by
the demonstration of Bartoněk (1971) that East Argolic belongs to that major-
ity of dialects which do not exhibit the long vowel merger, while West Argolic
must be treated separately. In West Argolic the outcomes of the first and third
compensatory lengthenings merged with inherited η and ω, e.g.:
ἀπέστηλαν DGE 91.11, ἦμεν 85.10, 90.8, ἠνάτᾱι 91.3, cf. ἀνέθηκε 87, τίθητι
90.15;
βωλᾶς DGE 85.16, 91.4, cf. βωμ´ον 89.9.
Augmented forms of vowel-initial verb stems that one might expect to show con-
traction typically exhibit η, e.g. ἥσσαντο ‘they installed’ DGE 89.6, ἠργάσσαντο
89.13–14, but that could reflect the spread of the lengthened type inherited from
Proto-Greek. The contraction of o+o apparently always yields ου, i.e. ō, in o-stem
gen. sg. forms, e.g.:
του˜  συνεδρίουDGE 85.4, αὐτου˜  89.11, το˜υ  νᾱο˜υ  89.19, το˜υ  δαμου ̄́ 91.8.
The contraction of ε+ε in verb forms must at first have yielded ε¯, which was then
raised to ῑ; there are two examples in an early inscription in the epichoric alphabet
and another in a late inscription:
⁶ Buck’s δικασσίε¯ is a misprint; see the original publication, Van Effenterre and Demargne (1937:
334).


===== PDF PAGE 333 =====
7.2 L ATER SOUND CHANGES 323
τελɩ̄́τοˉ ‘let him pay the tariff ’ DGE 83.A.13, ἀφαιρῖσθαι B.6, καλῖσθαι 99.12.
If contraction occurred after the third compensatory lengthening, the
lengthening-then-merger hypothesis makes sense: the products of compensatory
lengthenings, at first ε¯ and ˉo, merged with the inherited long vowels; the products
of subsequent contractions, also ε¯ and ˉo, developed in a different direction.
Finally, there is the situation in Lokrian. In Ozolian Lokrian it is clear from
spellings such as εἶμεν DGE 366.6 (etc.), acc. pl. πολεμίους 366.11, inf. τρέφειν
366.17 that the new long mid vowels did not merge with the inherited ones; from
eastern Lokris there is very little epigraphical material, but the consistent spelling
Ὀπούντιοι (e.g. DGE 367.1, 368.1) points in the same direction. In the colony
of Lokroi Epizephyrioi, however, they did merge with η and ω; in the corpus of
Franciscis (1972) we find, for example:
πὰρ τῶ θεῶ 1.1, βωλᾶς 2.7, acc. pl. τως´ 4.7, cf. inherited θησαυρῶι 2.1,
προαρχ´οντων 4.1;
ὀφήλει ‘owes’ 5.12, cf. inherited μην´ος 1.4, ποιῆσαι 9.13.
Since the colony was founded early in the 7th century (Jeffery 1991: 284–5), the
obvious hypothesis is that the merger occurred after the foundation of the colony
but before the date of the surviving inscriptions, which are late enough to exhibit
some Attic koine forms (Ringe 1984: 250).
7.2.5 Outcomes of palatalization: σσ ~ ττ
A number of Proto-Greek consonant clusters eventually merged in ∗/tʦ/ or the
like (see 3.6.3, 3.7):
a) ∗k(ʰ)y;
b) ∗t(ʰ)+y in all dialects, and ∗t(ʰ)y with no intervening morpheme boundary
except in South Greek, where the outcome was instead σ;
c) dental stop + ∗s intervocalically after a short vowel except in South Greek,
where the outcome was σ.
In a few early East Ionic inscriptions the outcome is still spelled with a special
letter Ͳ (e.g. DGE 701, 707, 744 = Buck 2), implying a pronunciation not other-
wise provided for in the Greek alphabets, which shows that the eventual outcomes
developed at least partly separately in the various dialects. In most dialects, includ-
ing East Ionic, the eventual outcome was σσ. In Cretan, Boiotian, West Ionic, and
Attic it was ττ. The Cretan development must have been separate, but it is hard
to believe that there is no historical connection between the ττ’s of the three adja-
cent dialects, two of which were South Greek while the third was very different.


===== PDF PAGE 334 =====
324 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
For examples see 3.6.3 and the dialect handbooks. This is perhaps the most salient
innovation that cuts across older dialect boundaries.
7.2.6 Psilosis
So far as we can tell, PGk ∗h survived only word-initially in the post-Mycenaean
dialects. It did not survive in all of them; its loss is referred to as ‘psilosis’. Psilosis
was regular in Lesbian and East Ionic, and it might have spread from one to
the other; but it was also regular in Cretan and Elean (Buck 1955: 53), in which
it must have been an independent development. Even where /h-/ survived,
it seems to have been variably lost, or lost in some environments, in many
dialects; the discussion of Buck (1955: 52–5) is a good summary of the complex
situation.
Our East Ionic literary texts typically write the spiritus asper even though it
clearly was not present in the originals. For Herodotos that is revealed by the fact
that we find ἀπ’ and κατ’, not ἀφ’ and καθ’, when the following vowel-initial word is
marked with the spiritus asper. For Homer the situation is more baroque, because
our text was Atticized at least once in antiquity (see especially Wackernagel 1916
for extensive discussion). The fact that contracted ἥλιος has a spiritus asper, while
uncontracted ἠέλιος does not, shows part of what has happened: when the letters
of a word were the same in the text of Homer as in (probably 6th-century) Attic,
the Attic breathings (and, probably, accents) were introduced into the text; when
the form was foreign to Attic, it was left alone. But then what are we to make of
the fact that ἀφ’ and καθ’ are ubiquitous in our text of Homer? Did the aspiration
on those clitic-final consonants survive for a while even after /h-/ was lost, much
as the hiatus survives before French ‘h aspiré’, or is this just more Atticism? I don’t
think we know.
7.3 Later morphological changes
7.3.1 Third-person plural imperatives
I argued in 4.2.6 (vi) that active 3pl. iptv. -ντον, preserved in Lesbian and colo-
nial Rhodian and ancestral to Pamphylian -δυ, must be an archaism because of its
distribution. The other dialects have modified or replaced this ending in a pattern
that cuts across the more obvious isoglosses (Buck 1955: 113–14).
A simple and obvious modification of -ντον was the importation of ω from
3sg. -τω, yielding -ντων. That is the ending familiar from Attic-Ionic; it occurs


===== PDF PAGE 335 =====
7.3 L ATER MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGES 325
also in Theran (and Kyrenaian, according to Buck) and in Cretan, as well as in
Delphian; there is also a possible example from Elean:
Theran ἀναγραψάντων DGE 226.18, θέντων 226.19;
Cretan πρᾱξάντων DGE 193.109, ἀγγραψάντων 193.117;
Delphian φερ´οντων  DGE 323.B.11, συναγ´οντων  B.23–4;
Elean κ]ριθέντονˉ DGE 418.21.
The isolation of Delphian and Elean from the other dialects that have this ending
argues that it is a relative archaism.
The maximally innovative alternative -ντω occurs in all the mainland Doric
dialects, as well as in Arkadian and Lokrian; in Boiotian it has been altered to
-νθω by a process that is not well understood. Its distribution suggests that it spread
through the dialect continuum. But -ντω also occurs in Rhodian and Koan, and
it is unclear whether that was a separate innovation or whether the ending spread
via the trade routes. The following examples are typical:
Arkadian διαγν´οντω DGE 656.8;
Lakonian δ´οντω DGE 22.18;
West Argolic ἔντοˉ DGE 78.7, παρ]εχ´οντˉ o  83.1;
East Argolic ἀποσ[τ]ειλάντω DGE 104.15;
Megarian ἀναγραψάντω DGE 163.19;
Boiotian στᾱσάνθω DGE 462.16;
Lokrian ἀποδ´οντω DGE 366.A.7;
Rhodian ἀθρε´οντω DGE 281.18;
Koan ἰ´οντω DGE 251.A.5.
There are no Cyprian examples of 3pl. imperatives. The only Thessalian example
that I can find is ἔστουσαν DGE 614.43; like Boiotian ἀποδ´οτωσαν DGE 523.100,
it is certainly a (superficially naturalized) Attic koine form.
A final active third-person plural imperative form is Ionic ἔστων, identical with
the third-person dual. It occurs in Homer at Od. 1.273;⁷ in East Ionic inscriptions
it appears at DGE 688.A.21 (from Chios), and in Cycladic Ionic at Buck 7.B.11;⁸
Smyth (1894: 590) and Bechtel (1924: 177) cite a Chalkidian example (not in
DGE).
The distribution of the corresponding mediopassive endings is different and
less coherent; they tend to be parallel to the active endings (on which they are
modeled), but both final -ν and medial -ν- are somewhat more common. See Buck
(1955: 113–14) for the details.
⁷ The other Homeric example, at Il. 1.338, is ambiguous, since it conjoins a dual and a plural.
⁸ Buck’s ἔστω is a misprint; see the original publication, Daux (1949: 59).


===== PDF PAGE 336 =====
326 WIDELY SHARED L ATER INNOVATIONS
7.3.2 Subjunctives and optatives
As noted in 4.2.5, the short-voweled subjunctive of athematic stems, especially
the sigmatic aorist, is well attested in Homer and continues to be attested in Les-
bian, East Ionic, and the southeastern Doric dialects well down into the Classical
period. That shows that the long-voweled alternant must have spread to those
stems through the dialect continuum at a comparatively recent date.
I have argued in 2.3.3 (i) that secondary endings were original in the subjunctive.
As Buck (1955: 119 notes), 2sg. and 3sg. forms with secondary endings typically
appear in Arkadian, Elean, Boiotian, and Thessalian, which suggests that they are
archaisms that have been eliminated in the other dialects. The Kyrenaian sigmatic
aorist 2sg. forms in -ες are a different matter, since in that dialect the corresponding
3sg. ends in -ει (Hoenigswald 1997: 96–7); it seems likely that they are products
of restructuring, either by Hoenigswald’s scenario (op. cit.) or otherwise.
Some dialects have extracted from the subjunctive of thematic stems a rule
‘lengthen the stem vowel in the subjunctive’, whence such forms as subj. δύνᾱται
to indic. δύναται (Buck 1955: 120–1). That is obviously an innovation, but its
cross-dialectal pattern is not clear, except that the Doric islands (including Crete)
provide a large proportion of the examples.
Also as noted in 4.2.5, the original optative of the sigmatic aorist survives
only in Cretan 3sg. δικακσίε¯, κοσμησίε¯ Buck 116.2, 3pl. ϝέρκσιεν DGE 175.7.
The optative suffix appears to have been remodeled in stages. The oldest stage
of the remodeling is preserved in Arkadian ὐνιερṓσει ‘dedicates’ Buck 16.3 and
διακωλύσει ‘hinders’ DGE 656.6–7: the optative sign -ι, as in thematic -ο-ι, has
been added to the indicative 3sg. of the sigmatic aorist. Of course the result is
easily confusable with the future indicative of many verbs, and with the (original)
sigmatic aorist subjunctive (in most dialects, though not in Arkadian, which has
only the secondary 2sg. and 3sg. endings—see above). The next stage was the
addition of -ε to disambiguate the form, yielding the -σ-ειε familiar in Attic-Ionic;
from other dialects Buck (1955: 121) cites Lesbian δ]ιαδέξειε ‘shows clearly’
IG XII-2.527.57 and Elean κατιαραύσειε ‘brings a charge’ DGE 409.2. On that
specific form were modeled 2sg. -ειας and 3pl. -ειαν; that the 3sg. was the starting
point explains why there is no 1sg. ‘-εια’ (a fact which puzzled Buck, loc. cit., and
Forbes 1958b: 174). Of course there was an alternative, namely sigmatic aorist
-σα-ι- parallel to thematic -ο-ι-; that straightforward innovation is unsurprisingly
widespread. Elean ἀδεαλτωhαιε ´ ‘defaces, renders illegible’ DGE 424.12 can only
represent a conflation of the two types.⁹
⁹ This scenario strikes me as more realistic than that of Forbes (1958b), both because she relies
on proportional analogy based on the passive aorist, which is unexpected, and because the scenario
preferred here offers answers to all the details that puzzled Forbes.


===== PDF PAGE 337 =====
7.3 L ATER MORPHOLOGICAL CHANGES 327
7.3.3 Perfect stems
I noted in 4.2.3 (i) that in active perfects made to roots ending in vowels -κ- at first
occurred only in the indicative singular and the subjunctive, and that while such
a distribution is still largely visible in Homer, in later Greek it survives only in a
few very common perfects, especially ἕστηκε ‘is standing upright’ and τέθνηκε ‘is
dead’. To that generalization there are two exceptions in Greek inscriptions.
Boiotian preserves the original distribution of -κ- down through the 2nd cen-
tury BC at least as well as Homer does. Here is a list of the relatively intact Boiotian
active perfects made to vowel-final roots that are known to me (Ringe 1984:
172–86):
ἀντέθεικε̣ καταβεβάων
διεσσείλθεικε κα[ταβε]βλει̣ ωσᾱς ´
παρκέκλεικε ἀποδεδοάνθι, δεδωῶσα ἴη, δεδωῶση
ἐπ]ομωμοκε´ πεπιτευ´οντεσσι
πεποι´οντεισσι
ϝεϝῡκονομει´οντων
ἀπειλθείοντες
ἀφειωσᾱς ´
The distribution is obvious. The only exception, ἐκτεθήκανθι DGE 450.6, is an
inscription from Aigosthena showing substantial Megarian influence; not only the
κ but also the η are Doric rather than Boiotian.
The other exception is Arkadian, and it is early. In DGE 661.1 we find [ϝο]φλεˉ  ̄́ασι
‘they owe’ beside ϝοφλεˉ ¯κ´οσι ‘in the case of those who owe’ 661.18; clearly -κ- has
already begun to spread, though not to the 3pl. yet. Jeffery (1991: 214) dates it
to the middle of the 5th century. In later Arkadian inscriptions -κ- has spread
throughout the paradigm to the same extent as in Attic; relevant 4th-century forms
are ἀπυδεδωκως´ DGE 657.44, κατηνθηκ´οτι  657.39, λελαβηκ ως´  656.14, ἐφθορκ ως´
656.10–11, and optative ἰγκεχηρήκοι ‘has begun’ 656.12.
Finally, a word should be said about thematized forms of the perfect. The the-
matic participles of Lesbian, Thessalian, and Boiotian have been mentioned in
5.2.1, and thematic perfect infinitives and modal forms appear in various dialects.
Thematic perfect indicatives are much less common, and it seems worth noting
that they appear most often in the extreme southeast of insular Doric (Buck 1955:
118), apparently a local innovation.
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0007


===== PDF PAGE 338 =====
8
Syntax
So far as can be determined, Ancient Greek syntax had undergone little change
from PIE (on which, see 2.5 above). Innovations have affected all the dialects more
or less equally; as Buck remarks, syntactic differences between the dialects are
modest and mostly amount to the preservation of archaisms (Buck 1955: 136).
The following developments seem worth mentioning.
8.1 Constituent order
The largest scale change in Greek syntax is exceptionally difficult to see in the
texts because of the great flexibility of Greek word order. It is clear enough that
PIE clauses were underlyingly verb-final; it is equally clear that the Greek of the
New Testament is underlyingly verb-medial. Obviously a major shift in word order
has occurred, but when and how?
Taylor (1990) was able to answer that question by an investigation of Home-
ric word order; her discussion (pp. 82–95) should be read in its entirety, but the
crucial points are easily summarized. It is taken for granted that movement rules
do not move two or more constituents together, simply because rules that did
would be too difficult for native learners to learn. Given that premise, the fact that
Greek noun phrases and even parts of noun phrases can be ‘scrambled’ extensively
becomes a powerful tool for determining the underlying order of constituents in
a clause (pp. 86–91). It is commonplace in Homer to find discontinuous noun
phrases of which one part precedes the verb and another follows; there are also
discontinuous noun phrases of which both parts precede the verb. In a sample
including Iliad 1 and 2.1–264, Taylor found that if both parts precede the verb one
part is always in clause-initial position. Here are her figures for that sample, where
# indicates the beginning of the clause and the two X’s the two parts of the DP
(Taylor 1990: 90 with notes 3 and 4 p. 129):
configuration number percentage
#X…X…V 15 13%
#…X…V…X 35 31%
#X…V…X 62 55% (N = 112)
There was only one example in which both parts of a discontinuous NP followed
the verb. Since at least one part is almost always preverbal, the most economical


===== PDF PAGE 339 =====
8.1 CONSTITUENT ORDER 329
analysis is that Homeric Greek is underlyingly verb-final, and that postverbal NP’s
and parts of NP’s result from movement rules. That is corroborated by the behav-
ior of the complements of verbs that take two complements (Taylor 1990: 91–5).
A complete survey of finite forms of διδο˜υναι ‘give’ and τιθήμεναι ‘put’, the two
commonest such verbs, yielded the following results (where ‘+O’ indicates part of
a complement):
configuration number percentage
OOV 69 47%
OVO 46 31%
OOV+O 15 10%
VOO 10 7%
OV+OO 5 3%
OOV+O+O 1 1% (N = 146)
Even the raw numbers and percentages strongly suggest a verb-final underlying
order. But Taylor proceeds to test the two hypotheses, verb-final and verb-medial,
against the above data and corresponding data for the single-object verbs τɩ́̄¯νε
‘honor’, κτε̄́ νε¯ν ‘kill’, and αἱρε˜ν ‘take’. Under the verb-final hypothesis she finds
(p. 94):
verb-final hypothesis
number of moves pattern 2-object verbs 1-object verbs
0 (O)OV 69 47% 111 43%
1 (O)VO 46 31% 93 36%
2 (O)OV+O, VOO 25 17% 55 21%
3 or more OVO+O, OOV+O+O 6 4% (NA)
Under the verb-medial hypothesis Taylor finds (p. 95):
verb-medial hypothesis
number of moves pattern 2-object verbs 1-object verbs
0 VO(O) 10 7% 93 36%
1 OV(O) 46 31% 111 43%
2 +OV(O), OOV 74 50% 55 21%
3 or more +OOVO, +O+OVOO 16 11% (NA)
Under the verb-final hypothesis the incidence of each pattern decreases mono-
tonically as the number of moves required to attain it increases, both for double-
complement and for single-object verbs; under the verb-medial hypothesis the
numbers make no sense at all. It follows that the underlying order of constituents
in Homeric Greek was verb-final.
Since similar tests reveal that the koine Greek of the New Testament was verb-
medial (Taylor 1990: 151), the shift must have occurred within the documented
history of Ancient Greek. Similar shifts in the documented history of English have


===== PDF PAGE 340 =====
330 SYNTAX
been studied intensively, and it is clear that they occur gradually, with the inno-
vative alternative slowly increasing in incidence, generation after generation, at a
constant rate, so long as relevant conditions do not change (see especially Kroch
1989 for exemplification and discussion). Taylor makes a strong case that the
competition between the two alternatives was well underway in the 5th century,
arguing from the position of clitics (Taylor 1990: 153–64).
But what does it mean, in real terms, to say that there is a robust competition
between two alternative underlying constituent orders? Readers unfamiliar with
generative syntax need to remember that it is NOT a model of language pro-
duction; no one is suggesting that in the production of a sentence the speaker
begins with the underlying order and then literally moves constituents around.
The coexistence of two underlying orders actually means that native learners can-
not figure out which of the two is the basic, unmarked order for statements where
no special emphasis is required. Native learners are clearly programmed to find
a basic, unmarked constituent order in the language they are learning natively;
that is why there is an obvious unmarked order in each of thousands of lan-
guages, every one of which has been re-created by its native learners in every
generation. Yang (2002: 34–6) suggests a simple model for how native learn-
ers might zero in on the correct solution from data which are often ambiguous:
in effect, each of the possible hypotheses is penalized for every utterance heard
which it cannot account for, and the hypothesis that accrues the smallest number
of penalties is eventually adopted by the native learner. Usually one hypothesis
wins, but not always; if the learner constantly hears alternatives which simply
cannot be predicted from a single underlying configuration, (s)he will posit two.
It seems that that was the situation in post-Homeric Ancient Greek for many
generations.
8.2 Prohibitions
It is fairly commonplace for IE languages to treat prohibitions, or negative com-
mands, somewhat differently from positive commands. In Spanish, for instance,
it is simply ungrammatical to use the sentential negative no with an imperative;
even to a small child¹ you cannot say ∗¡No lo haz!—you must instead use the sub-
junctive: ¡No lo hagas! ‘Don’t do it!’ Ancient Greek is no exception, but the details
of its grammatical rules might reveal something about its prehistory.
While it is normal to express an imperfective prohibition in Greek—i.e. ‘stop
Xing’ or ‘don’t (ever) X’—by μή with the present imperative, it is normal to express
a perfective prohibition—‘don’t X (which you were about to do)’—by μή with the
aorist subjunctive (Smyth 1956: 409–11). In terms of the synchronic grammar of
¹ Using an imperative with almost anyone else is of course rude in Spanish.


===== PDF PAGE 341 =====
8.2 PROHIBITIONS 331
Ancient Greek that doesn’t make much sense, but it does suggest that at some point
in the past the use of a sentential negative with an imperative was not normal; that
such a rule survives (even if restructured) only in the aorist can be attributed to the
fact that perfective prohibitions are much more typical and are more often heard
by native learners.
That surmise is supported by details of the grammars of (at least) Hittite,
Tocharian, Vedic, and Latin. In Hittite, which has no subjunctive or optative, the
prohibitive negative lē is used with the present rather than with the imperative
(Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 344). The same is usually true in Tocharian, which
does have a subjunctive and optative; in the Tocharian B caravan passes one finds,
for instance, ceṃ parra ptārka; tesa auṣap mā ta¨rkanat ‘let these through; more
than that do not let (through)’, where ptārka is an imperative (clearly marked by
its prefix p-) while ta¨rkanat is the corresponding present 2sg. In Vedic the pro-
hibitive negative mā́ is used with an injunctive, i.e. a secondary indicative with
no augment; a typical example is mā́ na Indra párā vr̥ ṇak ‘do not abandon us,
Indra!’ RV VIII.97.7, the corresponding imperative being vr̥ ṅdʰi. In Latin, as many
readers of this book will be aware, nē is normally used in prohibitions only with
the perfect subjunctive, e.g. nē crēdiderīs ‘don’t believe (it)!’, in which the verb
form has the inherited perfective sense rather than the innovative anterior sense,
much like a Greek aorist subjunctive (though etymologically the Latin form is an
optative).
What are we to make of this configuration of facts? Even though Hittite is
attested just as early and both it and Tocharian are outliers in the diversification
of the IE family, Vedic might hold the key to this puzzle. In principle, an injunc-
tive is temporally and modally unspecified: it marks person, number, aspect, and
voice, but not tense or mood (Hoffmann 1967a). It therefore makes sense to use
an injunctive with a negative which already clearly marks a prohibition, necessar-
ily for the (possibly immediate) future. What we need to figure out is what this
implies for the reconstruction of the PIE verb. In particular, since an injunctive is
a form with secondary endings but no augment, does it follow that the augment
was part of the inherited verb system?
It does not, for the following reasons. Even the structure of the person-and-
number endings shows that the secondary endings were unmarked in PIE (see
2.3.3 (iii)); it should follow that they did not mark past tense but simply failed
to mark present tense. The use of prohibitive negative ∗mḗ with such unmarked
forms follows automatically. The fact that its successors are used with the present
in Hittite and Tocharian must then reflect a shift in the markedness of inflectional
categories. In Indo-Iranian the use of the augment as a past tense marker nar-
rowed the function of the unaugmented form to tenselessness. What happened
in Greek and Latin must have been more complex. Gothic actually provides a
clue: the phrase ni ogs þus ‘do not be afraid’ (four times) includes an aberrant
verb form that can only reflect pre-Gothic ∗ōgiz < ∗-es, the expected outcome of


===== PDF PAGE 342 =====
332 SYNTAX
an injunctive in Germanic.² It seems worth suggesting that in some branches of the
family the original construction with a verb form unmarked for tense or mood was
replaced by an overtly modal form because the marking of verb forms had shifted,
as in Anatolian and Tocharian; the details are likely to have been different in each
branch.
8.3 Moods
One function of the PIE subjunctive, the expression of future time, has largely
been taken over by the innovative future tense in Greek (though there are Homeric
examples in which the use of the subjunctive is still close to that of a future; see
Chantraine 1963: 209–10). In main clauses the Greek subjunctive still expresses
exhortations or (in the 1sg.) the intention of the speaker. Its use in deliberative
questions is much like that of Vedic and is probably inherited; its use with μή to
express that the speaker does not want something to happen resembles its use with
néd (i.e. ná ı´d, where´dı is emphatic) in Vedic, and although the negative employed
is not the same, it seems likely that there is some historical connection between the
two constructions.
However, many uses of the Greek subjunctive are not closely paralleled in
Indo-Iranian, the only other branch of the family that clearly retains both cog-
nate subjunctives and cognate optatives.³ In particular, the use of the subjunctive
with ἄν (/ κεν/κα, depending on the dialect) in subordinate clauses is clearly a
Greek innovation. Most striking is the ‘future more vivid’ conditional construc-
tion, with the subjunctive and ἄν in the conditional clause and the future in the
main clause. It looks as though the subjunctive might at first have been used in
both clauses, only to be replaced by the future in the main clause once that inno-
vative inflectional category was well established. But even such a construction with
the subjunctive in both clauses would have been a Greek innovation.
The Greek optative has remained closer to its ancestral roots, expressing the
wishes of the speaker and potential events. But once again its use with ἄν, and
most of its uses in subordinate clauses, are Greek innovations. The tendency to use
optatives in subordinate clauses dominated by a main clause in a past tense, but
subjunctives in those dominated by a non-past tense, is certainly a Greek inno-
vation; there is nothing like it in Vedic, and the Latin sequence-of-tenses rule is
different in detail and must be a parallel innovation.
² The form is also used in a positive command at Romans 11:20 and 13:4, in the former case imme-
diately following a prohibition; it seems reasonable to suggest an extension of the original usage in
prohibitions.
³ The Tocharian subjunctives are largely of different origin; in Italic the PIE subjunctive has become
a future tense, while in Celtic the subjunctive and optative seem to have undergone syntactic merger.


===== PDF PAGE 343 =====
8.4 UNIVERBATION 333
Finally, the use of augmented past tenses in contrary-to-fact conditions, typ-
ically with ἄν in the main clause, must also be a Greek innovation. In general,
using a past tense to represent an unreal situation is a natural development—many
languages, including English, use past tenses that way—but it is interesting that a
language provided with a rich repertory of categories that could be irrealis has
resorted to past indicative forms as well.
8.4 Univerbation
I noted in 2.5 that in all the earliest attested daughters of PIE (and in many others)
some adverbs are used as preverbs, and that they were eventually ‘univerbated’
with their verbs. The process of univerbation can be followed by comparison of
the most archaic IE languages. In Hittite only the preverbs pe-and u-, which have
no certain cognates in the non-Anatolian languages, have undergone univerbation
with their verbs (Hoffner and Melchert 2008: 296); all the others are sepa-
rate phonological words. Of the latter, the following have (at least approximate)
cognates in Greek:
anda ‘into’ cf. ἐν ‘in(to)’
āppa ‘back’ cf. ἐπί ‘on(to)’, Myc. o-pi-⁴
katta ‘down’ = κατά
parā ‘out, forth’ = προ´
In Vedic univerbation is rule-governed: it always occurs in subordinate clauses and
in nominal forms, but never in main clauses. Several Vedic preverbs have cognates
in Greek:
ánu ‘along’ cf. ἀνά ‘up, along’
ápa ‘away, off ’ = ἀπ´ο
ápi ‘close to, on’ = ἐπί, Myc. o-pi-
abʰ´ı ‘up to, against’ = ἀμφί ‘on both sides of ’
úpa ‘toward’ = ὑπ´ο
pári ‘around’ = περί
prá ‘forward’ = προ´
práti ‘back’ = πρ´ος ‘toward’
In addition, the preposition upári ‘over, above’, which is not used as a preverb, is
cognate with Gk ὑπέρ.
The only Greek preverbs not mentioned above are ἀντί ‘instead of ’, διά ‘through’,
ἐξ ‘out of ’, μετά (πεδά) ‘with, after’, παρά ‘beside’, and ξύν (σύν) ‘with’, as well as
the clearly innovative ε̄̓ ς ‘into’ (see 5.4.2); most have at least approximate cognates
⁴ Probably not ἀπο- ‘off, away’, the meaning of which is completely different.


===== PDF PAGE 344 =====
334 SYNTAX
elsewhere in the IE family, preverbs or prepositions or both (cf. Lat. ante, ex, dis-,
Goth. miþ, faúr, Arm. yet; the discussion of Brugmann 1911: 758–930 is still use-
ful). Univerbation seems already to have occurred in Mycenaean Greek and is
universal in post-Homeric prose, but the fact that it is still optional in Homer
shows that it spread through the dialect continuum.
8.5 Clitics
Homeric Greek preserves ‘Wackernagel’s Law’, the rule placing clitics in second
position within the clause, without modification: not only clause clitics, but also
indefinite pronouns and unstressed personal pronouns form a clitic chain after
a clause-initial constituent (often a single accented word). In later Greek that is
still an option, but clitics are also found in other positions. Taylor (1990: 133–
64) demonstrates, with numerous examples, that post-Homeric clitics which do
not ‘float’ into second position in the clause are instead positioned within the
constituents in which they originate, typically DP or VP.
The order of clitics in a chain seems to be fixed in certain cases but not in others
(see the observations of Denniston 1954: lx–lxi). Comparison of one particular
collocation across dialects shows that at least some orders must have shifted over
time. Attic ἐᾱ̀ ν δέ τις and Ionic ἢν δέ τις exhibit the order ‘if ’ + ἄν + δέ + indefinite;
but we find the positions of δέ and ἄν switched in Arkadian (εἰ δ’ ἄν ͷις), Lesbian
(αἰ δέ κέ τις), and Thessalian (αἰ μά κέ κις), while West Greek instead has αἰ δέ τίς
κα and Boiotian shows variation between the last two options (Buck 1955: 140).
Obviously no more than one of these orders can be original, to the extent that the
order was fixed at all.
8.6 Prepositions
Whether or not PIE had prepositions, all attested stages of Greek do. It is note-
worthy that the list of inherited prepositions is identical with that of preverbs; that
is similar to the Vedic situation and could be inherited from their last common
parent. Differences between the dialects are almost entirely differences of detail
(Buck 1955: 106–10); the following seem worth mentioning. The difference in
shape between Att.-Ion. πρ´ος, Hom. προτί, Cretan πορτί on the one hand and
Arkadian π´ος,  West Greek π´οτ  on the other is actually inherited: the former is
cognate with Vedic práti, the latter with Avestan paiti. The most significant differ-
ence in usage is that in Arkadian and Cyprian prepositions which in other dialects
govern the genitive normally govern the dative (Buck 1955: 108); because of the
isolation of Cyprian in the 1st millennium, that common innovation must go back
roughly to the Mycenaean period.


===== PDF PAGE 345 =====
8.7 REFLE XIVES 335
8.7 Reflexives
It seems likely that in PIE reflexives and reciprocals were expressed by the
mediopassive voice (see 2.3.1), much like the derived reflexive and reciprocal verbs
of Semitic and Algonkian languages. No attested daughter preserves that situation
unaltered, however. Mediopassive verbs can still be used reflexively in Tocharian,
e.g.:
Toch. B ārwer yamaṣṣamnte. ‘We have made ourselves ready.’
But it is more usual to use an overt reflexive pronoun, e.g.:
Toch. B wnolmi tallāñco nāksante ṣañ-añm ‘wretched beings blamed them-
selves’ (cited by Adams 2015: 152).
In Hittite reflexives and reciprocals are still expressed by mediopassives but are
also usually marked by the particle -z(a), e.g.:
kinuna=wa⁵ ehu, nu=wa zahhiyauwastati ‘Come now, let us do battle with each
other’ (Hoffner and Melchert 308: 314).
In Core IE, the 3sg. pronoun ∗swé- ~ ∗ se- (attested in Hittite as enclitic dat. =sse
‘to him/her’) has been repurposed as a reflexive pronoun, but that development
seems to have occurred in the independent prehistories of the branches.
Middle verb forms are no longer used as explicit reflexives in Greek, though
some are naturally translated as reflexive, e.g. παρασκευάζεσθαι ‘prepare (oneself ),
get prepared’; the implicit object cannot be modified by another word. The mid-
dle voice does survive, however, to express an implicit relation between the object
of the verb and the subject. The situation in Vedic is similar, though it evolved
independently.
In Homer ἕ ~ ἑ seems to be used both as a reflexive and as an ordinary third-
person pronoun, partly with a difference in accent; in subordinate clauses ἑ and μιν
seem to be used in much the same way (Chantraine 1963: 153–4). The pronoun
αὐτ´ος is emphatic only, not reflexive. In post-Homeric Greek a shift in function has
occurred: αὐτ´ον, etc., is usually used with ἐμέ, σέ, ἕ, etc., when they are reflexive
within the same clause, but not when they occur in a subordinate clause (Smyth
1956: 304–6). Thus the development of αὐτ´ος in Ancient Greek is more or less the
same as that of self in Middle English (Vezzosi 2007).
⁵ -wa is the quotative particle.
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0008


===== PDF PAGE 346 =====
9
Lexicon
9.1 Derivational morphology
Most of the PIE stem-forming suffixes and compound types discussed in 2.4 sur-
vive in Ancient Greek, some remaining productive; here I will summarize some
early Greek innovations, few of which can be dated relative to any other devel-
opment. Debrunner (1917) and Risch (1974) provide good overviews in detail,
while Buck and Petersen (1949) is an exhaustive list of examples of suffixes; all
three offer valuable discussion and references.
Two types of compound that are apparently confined to Greek and Indo-
Iranian have a verbal first member governing the second (Brugmann 1906:
63–4). In one type the first member is an aspect stem; typical are Rigvedic Skt
Trasádasyus ‘terrifying the enemy’ and Hom. ἀρχέκακος ‘starting trouble, trou-
blemaker’, Tληπ´ολεμος ‘enduring battle’. In the other type the first member ends
in ∗-ti-, e.g. Rigvedic Skt vītı´hotras ‘inviting to the sacrifice’, Hom. βωτιάνɛ¯ρα
‘nourishing men’, τερψίμβροτος ‘delighting mortals’. To judge from their distribu-
tion, these types must have arisen toward the eastern end of the Central IE dialect
continuum. They remained productive in Greek, especially in coining personal
names.
A first member of compounds that appears only in Greek and Indo-Iranian is
ἀγα- ‘very’, e.g. in Hom. ἀγά-ννιφος ‘very snowy’ (νν < ∗sn, Aiolism; see 5.2.2),
Ἀγαμέμνων ‘Very-steadfast’; it is cognate with Avestan aš-‘great’, e.g. in aš.bāzāuš
‘with big arms’, aš.mizˇdå ‘bringing great reward’, both reflecting ∗ m̥ ǵh₂-, zero grade
of ∗meǵh₂- ‘big’.
There is also a derivational suffix peculiar to Greek and Indo-Iranian (Risch
1974: 150–1 with references); it appears in Sanskrit as -tvaná-(e.g. mahitvanám
‘size’; cf. Whitney 1889: 477–8) and in Greek as -σύνᾱ (e.g. Hom. δōλοσύνη
‘slavery’). Greek adjectives in -συνος are much rarer and usually attested later
(Debrunner 1917: 162); they might be secondary developments.
Neuter nouns in ∗ -mn̥ and r/n-stems have lost their original ablaut alternations
but acquired a -τ- in their oblique stems; the oblique suffix -ατ- then spread to
other neuter nouns denoting body parts (e.g. Hom. o̓˜ς,  o̓ ̄́ ατ- ‘ear’, Att. γ´ονυ,  γ´ονατ-
‘knee’). The source of the -τ- remains unknown; the supposed parallel of Lat. -men
and -mentum is not very helpful, since the longer Latin stem includes a known
suffix ∗-to-.


===== PDF PAGE 347 =====
9.1 DERIVATIONAL MORPHOLOGY 337
Verbal adjectives in ∗-tó- remained derived adjectives in Greek; they did not
become participles, as they did in Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Germanic, Celtic,
and Italic. But Greek also developed extended verbal adjectives in -τέος; though
the origin of the suffix is unclear, the fact that it does not undergo vowel contrac-
tion suggests that it was originally ∗-τέϝος. Surprisingly, these adjectives are almost
completely absent from Greek verse, though they are abundant in prose; see Buck
and Petersen (1949: 530) for discussion and references.
Agent nouns in -τήρ and -τωρ survive in Greek (δοτήρ, γενέτωρ, etc.), but over
time they were replaced by masculine ᾱ-stems in -τᾱς > Att.-Ion. -της; a good
brief discussion is Buck and Petersen (1949: 544–6). From that base the formation
was broadened to denote male persons connected with an activity or institution;
πολῑ́ της is an obvious example.
Many of the most characteristic Greek suffixes appear to be purely Greek cre-
ations. The most striking is -εύς, -ήϝ-, originally denoting a person having a specific
skill or office and already firmly in place in Mycenaean Greek (ka-ke-u ‘smith’,
i-je-re-u ‘priest’, qa-si-re-u ‘baron’, or the like, etc.); Torsten Meissner has made
a strong case that this suffix entered the language as a component of loanwords
(Meissner 2016: 27–8; see 4.3.3 above). Buck and Petersen (1949: 27) discusses
the development of this suffix in Greek.
Almost equally puzzling are the noun suffixes ending in -δ-. δεκάδ-, at least,
might preserve the original final consonant of ∗déḱm̥ d, and the suffix can have
spread to other numerals, just as ἀλλοδαπ´ος, etc., might preserve the original
final consonant of neut. ∗ályod (Debrunner 1917: 189). But for the most part
-άδ- and -ίδ- have no clear antecedents. Nouns with the latter are already fairly
numerous in Homer (e.g. ἀσπίς ‘shield’, ἐλπίς ‘hope’, δαΐδες ‘torches’), and there
are at least a few with the former (e.g. νιφάδες ‘snowflakes’); both suffixes are
productive in later Greek.
Of the suffixes ending in the thematic vowel, -ικ´ος competes with inherited -ιος
to form adjectives indicating connection with the base word; -ίσκο- (all genders)
and neut. -ιον are productive diminutive suffixes. All three suffixes are inherited,
but their distinctive functions are Greek innovations.
There are dialect differences in noun and adjective formation which show
that the development of various derivational types was comparatively recent (see
especially Buck 1955: 130–5). Two details are striking. Lesbian and Thessalian
routinely construct adjectives of material in -ιος, whereas other dialects have
-εος or (especially) -ινος; thus we find Lesb. neut. χρʋ̄́ σιον Sappho 1.8 but Hom.
χρʋ̄́ σεον, Att. χρῡσõν, Thess. λίθιος but Hom. λίθεος, while most post-Homeric
dialects have λίθινος, and so on. Lesbian and Thessalian also have patronymic
adjectives in -ιος, which is probably an archaism, since ∗ -yo- ~ ∗-io- was a pro-
ductive suffix in PIE. Other dialects had an originally patronymic suffix -ίδᾱς
(> Att.-Ion. -ίδης), -άδᾱς, possibly an extension of fem. -ίδ-, -άδ- (Debrunner


===== PDF PAGE 348 =====
338 LE XICON
1917: 192), which eventually lost its patronymic force and became a component
of names (Buck and Petersen 1949: 441–2) except in West Argolic (see e.g. DGE
89.2–5, 91.3–4). In Boiotian that suffix too has been extended, yielding - ´ωνδᾱς
(with syncope of -ι-), and the new suffix has begun to spread to adjacent areas
(Buck 1955: 131).
Of the inherited types of derived present stems (see 4.2.1 (v)), denominative
contract verbs continue to be productive throughout the history of Ancient Greek,
especially α- and ε-cοntracts; o-contracts mostly remain specialized for factitive
and instrumental verbs. Also very productive are presents in -εύɛ¯ν, -αίνɛ¯ν, -ʋ̄́ νɛ¯ν,
-ίζɛ¯ν, and -άζɛ¯ν; all five types are already well developed in Homer (see Risch
1974: 289–307), and their subsequent development is conveniently summarized in
Debrunner (1917: 104–40). It is worth noting (though not really surprising) that
all these productive formations were originally presents in ∗-yé/ó-, the last syllable
coda of the original base having been resegmented to yield a recognizable suffix.
All have acquired regular futures, aorists, and perfects in post-Homeric Greek (and
to some extent already in Homer).
9.2 Sources of the Greek lexicon
The Greek lexicon, like every other, includes numerous words that do not have
solid etymologies. Examination of the Swadesh hundred-word list¹ for Classical
Attic gives an idea of the situation.
Half the words on the list have good cognates with the same meanings in other
IE languages and were obviously inherited (though some have been remodeled);
I list them here with a cognate each (verbs in the pres. indic. 3sg. for ease of
comparison):
all (pl.) πάντες TB poñc
big μέγας Skt neut. máhi
bite δάκνει Skt causative daṃ´sayati
bone ὀστõν Hitt. hastai
claw ὄνυξ Lat. unguis
cloud νέφος Skt nábʰas
come προσέρχεται (see ‘go’)
dog κύων Skt sva
drink πινεῑ́ Skt ptc. pītás
¹ Morris Swadesh devised this list for anthropological linguists who wanted to assess quickly the
probable relationships of previously undiscovered languages. As has long been known, it is not an
ideal list for any purpose, but it is at least a list of basic vocabulary items which were selected for very
different purposes and is thus free of relevant bias.


===== PDF PAGE 349 =====
9.2 SOURCES OF THE GREEK LE XICON 339
ear o̓˜ς Lat. auris
eat ἐσθίει Hitt. ēz’zi
egg ὠι´ον Lat. ōvom
feather πτερ´ον TB pl. paruwa
fire π˜υρ Hitt. pahhur
fish ἰχθ˜υς Lith. zˇuvìs
fly πέτεται Skt pátati
foot πṓς Skt pā́ t
give δίδωσι Skt dádāti
go ἔρχεται OIr. iptv. eirgg
hand χɛ̄́ ρ Hitt. kissar
head κεφαλή Toch. A ´spāl
heart καρδίᾱ Hitt. kart-
horn κέρας Lat. cornū
hot θερμ´ος Arm. ǰerm
I ἐγ ω´ Lat. ego
knee γ´ονυ Hitt. gēnu
know οἶδε Skt véda
lie κεῖται Hitt. kitta
liver ἧπαρ Skt yákr ̥t
man ἀνήρ Skt nā́
many πολλοί Skt neut. purū́
meat κρέας Skt kravı´s
mouth στ´ομα Av. staman-
name ὄνομα Hitt. lāman
night νύξ Vedic Skt nák
one ɛ˜ς̓ Hitt. gen. siēl
red ἐρυθρ´ος Lat. ruber
sit κάθηται Hitt. esa
stand ἕστηκε Vedic Skt tastʰáu
star ἀστήρ Hitt. hasterz
sun ἥλιος Vedic Skt súar
swim νήχει Skt snā́ ti
tooth ὀδṓς Skt dán
two δύο Skt dvā́
water ὕδωρ Hitt. wātar
we ἡμɛ̃ ς Skt acc. asmā́ n
what τί Hitt. kuit
who τίς Hitt. kuis
woman γυνή Vedic Skt jánī
you (sg.) σύ Lat. tū


===== PDF PAGE 350 =====
340 LE XICON
Another seventeen words based on inherited roots have undergone various
derivational processes and/or shifts of meaning in Greek:
ashes τέφρᾱ cf. Skt dáhati ‘(s)he burns (it)’
bird ὄρνῑς cf. Hitt. hāran-‘eagle’
eye ὀφθαλμος´ cf. TB ek
full πλήρης cf. Lat. plēnus
green χλωρος´ cf. OCS zelenŭ
hear ἀκούει = Goth. hauseiþ, but both < ∗h₂ḱ-h₂ows-iéti ‘(s)he is
sharp-eared’
kill ἀποκτɛ ̄́νει cf. Skt kṣaṇóti ‘destroys’
long μακρος´ = Lat. macer ‘thin’
mountain ὄρος s-stem neut. deriv. of ὄρνυσθαι ‘rise’
path πάτος cf. Skt pántʰās? —but stressed zero-grade ∗ pnˊt- is̥ odd
rain υ ̄̔ετος´ cf. TB verb suwaṃ
sand ἄμμος cf. Hom. ἄμαθος = Middle High German sambt;
apparently the Attic form has been crossed with
ψάμμος (etymology uncertain)
say λέγει = Lat. legit ‘collects; reads’
tail o ̄̓ρα ̄́orig. collective of ∗ὄρσος ‘arse’
that ἐκɛ˜νος deriv. of ἐκεῖ ‘there’, probably built on ∗ḱi- ~ ∗ḱe- ‘this’
this οὗτος built on the article, details unclear
tree δένδρον (< δένδρε(ϝ)ον; deriv. of ∗dóru ‘tree, wood’, but details
obscure)
white λευκος´ cf. Lat. lūx ‘light’


===== PDF PAGE 351 =====
9.2 SOURCES OF THE GREEK LE XICON 341
But more than thirty of these basic words are unetymologized, or of uncertain
etymology:²
bark φλοιος´
belly γαστήρ (∗γραστήρ ‘eater’ implausible on semantic grounds)
black μέλᾱς
blood αἷμα
breast μαστος´   (connected with Hom. μαζος,´   but not clear how)
burn (intr.) κα ̄́εται (< καίεται, root καϝ-)
cold ψῡχρος´   (deriv. of ψʋ  ̄́χɛ¯ν ‘blow’)
die ἀποθνήισκει (root θαν(α)- ~ θνη-)
dry ξηρος´
earth γῆ
good ἀγαθος´
grease δημος´
hair θρί ξ
human ἄνθρωπος
leaf φύλλον
louse φθɛ ̄́ρ
moon σελήνη (deriv. of σέλας ‘torch’)
neck αὐχήν
new καινος´
nose ῥις̄́
not οὐ (etymology disputed: < ∗h₂óyu ‘life’, with semantic and syntactic
development like French pas ‘not’, orig. ‘step’ < Lat. passus?; see
Cowgill 1960)
root ῥίζα
round στρογγύλος
see ὀρᾶι
seed σπέρμα (deriv. of σπɛ ρɛ¯ν ‘sow’)
skin χροᾱ´   (cf. Hom. χρως) ´
sleep καθεύδει
small μῑκρος´
smoke καπνος´
stone λίθος
tongue γλῶττα
yellow ξανθος´
² I should say here that my standards are stricter than those of many etymological dictionaries. The
goal of a traditional etymological dictionary is to find a source for every word, so that uncertain or
even barely plausible hypotheses are worth reporting; but that is not easily compatible with scientific
historical linguistics, of which the goal is to figure out what is most likely to have happened and reject
everything judged insufficiently probable.


===== PDF PAGE 352 =====
342 LE XICON
It may seem surprising that one-third of the basic vocabulary cannot be accounted
for etymologically, but in fact Greek is not out of line with other ancient IE lan-
guages in that respect. The IE ‘homeland’, wherever it was exactly, must have been
fairly small; otherwise a unitary PIE would not be reconstructable. Almost every
attested IE language was a language of immigrants who must have borrowed words
from the (often larger) populations that they encountered in their new homes.
Place names and plant names containing -νθ- and -σσ- (or -ττ-) constitute
a clearly recognizable pre-Greek stratum of vocabulary (Schwyzer 1939: 510–
11, Buck and Petersen 1949: 444–5). Well-known examples include ἄψινθος,
τερέβινθος and (in Attica) Ὑμηττ´ος,  Προβάλινθος, (elsewhere) Παρνασσ ´ος,
K´ορινθος, Ζάκυνθος, Tίρυνς (-νθ-). Discussions of the origins of these suffixes
are necessarily speculative. Some other words can be identified as loanwords by
their distribution in the ancient Mediterranean; obvious examples are μᾶλον
(Att.-Ion. μῆλον) ‘apple’ (cf. Lat. mālum), πράσον ‘leek’ (cf. Lat. porrum), οἶνος
‘wine’ (cf. Lat. vīnum), and probably γάλα, γάλακτ- ‘milk’ (cf. Lat. lac, lact-). The
sources for such prehistoric loanwords are typically not identifiable (see Frisk
s.vv.). Later loanwords can often be etymologized; for example, it seems clear that
χρῡσ ´ος is a Northwest Semitic loanword (see Frisk s.v.).
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek. Don Ringe, Oxford University Press.
© Don Ringe (2024). DOI: 10.1093/9780191989162.003.0009


===== PDF PAGE 353 =====
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek
Don Ringe
https://doi.org/10.1093/9780191989162.0
01.0001
Published: 2024 Online ISBN:
9780191989162 Print ISBN:
9780198879022
Search in this book
END MATTER
Bibliography 
Published: March 2024
Subject:  Historical and Diachronic Linguistics, Classical Languages
Collection:  Oxford Scholarship Online
Adams, Douglas Q (ed.) 1997. Festschri  for Eric P. Hamp. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of Man.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Adams, Douglas Q  2015. Tocharian B: A grammar of syntax and word-formation. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen


===== PDF PAGE 354 =====
der Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Agbayani, Brian, and Chris  Golston. 2010. Phonological movement in Classical Greek. Language  86: 133–67
Google ScholarWorldCat
Anthony, David. 2007. The horse, the wheel, and language. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Anthony, David, and Don  Ringe. 2015. The Indo-European homeland from linguistic and archaeological perspectives. Annual
Review of Linguistics  1: 199–219.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Anttila, Raimo. 1969. Proto-Indo-European Schwebeablaut. Berkeley: University of California Press (= University of California
Publications in Linguistics 58).
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Aura Jorro, Francisco. 1999. Diccionario micénico. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bammesberger, Alfred (ed.) 1988. Die Laryngaltheorie und die Rekonstruktion der indogermanischen Laut- und Formensystems.
Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Barber, Peter J  2013. Sieversʼ Law and the history of semivowel syllabicity in Indo-European and Ancient Greek. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Barton, Charles R  1993. Greek τέθηπα, etc. Glotta  71: 1–9.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Bartoněk, Antonín. 1966. Development of the long vowel system in Ancient Greek dialects. Prague: Státní Pedagogické
Nakladelství.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bartoněk, Antonín. 1971. Das Ostargolische in der räumlichen Gliederung Griechenlands. Schmitt-Brandt, Robert (ed.), Donum
indogermanicum. Festgabe für Anton Scherer zum 70. Geburtstag. Heidelberg: Winter, 118–22.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bartoněk, Antonín. 2002. Handbuch des mykenischen Griechisch. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bechtel, Friedrich. 1921. Die griechischen Dialekte. 1. Band. Der lesbische, thessalische, böotische, arkadische, und kyprische
dialect. Berlin: Weidmann.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bechtel, Friedrich. 1923. Die griechischen Dialekte. 2. Band. Die westgriechischen Dialekte. Berlin: Weidmann.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bechtel, Friedrich. 1924. Die griechischen Dialekte. 3. Band. Der ionische Dialekt. Berlin: Weidmann.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Beek, Lucien van. 2022. The reflexes of syllabic liquids in Ancient Greek. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 355 =====
Beekes, R S P  1969. The development of the Proto-Indo-European laryngeals in Greek. The Hague: Mouton.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Beekes, R S P  1972. H₂O. Die Sprache  18: 117–31.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Beekes, R S P  2011. Comparative Indo-European linguistics: An introduction, 2nd ed.  Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Beekes, R S P  2013. Etymological dictionary of Greek. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Bendahman, Jadwiga. 1993. Der reduplizierte Aorist in den indogermanischen Sprachen. Dissertation, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität
zu Freiburg.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Benveniste, Émile. 1937. Hittite ḫatugi. Hjelmslev, Louis (ed.), Mélanges linguistiques o erts à M. Holger Pedersen. Aarhus:
Universitetsforlaget, 496–9.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 344Benveniste, Émile. 1951. Prétérit et optatif en indo-européen. Bulletin de la Société Linguistique de Paris  47: 11–20.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Berg, Nils. 1977. Der Ursprung des altgriechischen aktiven Plusquamperfekts und die Entwicklung der alphathematischen
Flexion. Norsk Tidsskri  for Sprogvidenskap  31: 205–63.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Berg, Nils, and Fredrik Otto  Lindeman. 1992. The etymology of Greek αὖος and Od. 19.327 αὐσταλέος: Homeric metrics and
linguistics—a question of priority. Glotta  70: 181–95.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Blust, Robert. 1974. A double counter-universal in Kelabit. University of Hawaii Working Papers in Linguistics  5: 49–56.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Brandenstein, Wilhelm. 1936. Streifzüge. 1. Die idg. Spiranten þ und ð.  Glotta  25: 27–30.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Brixhe, Claude. 1976. Le dialecte grec de Pamphylie. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Brixhe, Claude. 2004. Phrygian. Woodard, Roger D (ed.), The Cambridge encyclopaedia of the worldʼs ancient languages.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 777–88.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Brugmann, Karl. 1897. Grundriß der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen, Vol. I, 2nd ed.  Straßburg:
Trübner.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Brugmann, Karl. 1906. Grundriß der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen, Vol. II, Part 1, 2nd ed.
 Straßburg: Trübner.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Brugmann, Karl. 1911. Grundriß der vergleichenden Grammatik der indogermanischen Sprachen, Vol. II, Part 2, 2nd ed. Straßburg:
Trübner.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 356 =====
Buck, Carl D  1925. Epigraphical notes. Classical Philology  20: 133–44.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Buck, Carl D  1955. The Greek dialects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Buck, Carl D, and Walter  Petersen. 1949. A reverse index of Greek nouns and adjectives. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Byrd, Andrew M  2015. The Indo-European syllable. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Campbell, David. 1988. Greek lyric. I. Sappho and Alcaeus. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cardona, George. 1960. The Indo-European thematic aorists. Dissertation, Yale University.
Cardona, George. 1965. Vedic imperatives in -si.  Language  41: 1–18.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Cassio, Albio Cesare. 2018. Notes on the origin and di usion of the -εσσι datives. Giannakis et al. (eds.) 2018: 189–96.
Chang, Will, Chundra  Cathcart, David  Hall, and Andrew  Garrett. 2015. Ancestry-constrained phylogenetic analysis supports the
Indo-European steppe hypothesis. Language  91: 194–244.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Chantraine, Pierre. 1925. Les verbes grecs en  -θω. Mélanges linguistiques o erts à M. J. Vendryes. Paris: Champion, 93–108.*
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Chantraine, Pierre. 1927. Histoire du parfait grec. Paris: Champion.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Chantraine, Pierre. 1963. Grammaire homérique. Tome II. Syntaxe. Paris: Klincksieck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Chantraine, Pierre. 1973. Grammaire homérique. Tome I. Phonétique et morphologie. 5th printing, revised and corrected. Paris:
Klincksieck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Clackson, James. 2007. Indo-European linguistics: An introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Colvin, Stephen. 1999. Dialect in Aristophanes. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Colvin, Stephen. 2007. A historical Greek reader. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Colvin, Stephen. 2014. A brief history of Ancient Greek. Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Colvin, Stephen. 2016. The modal particle in Greek. Cambridge Classical Journal  62: 65–84.
Google ScholarWorldCat


===== PDF PAGE 357 =====
Comrie, Bernard. 1976. Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cooper, Adam I  2015. Reconciling Indo-European syllabification. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Corbett, Greville G  2000. Number. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cowgill, Warren. 1960. Greek ou and Armenian očʻ.  Language  36: 347–50.
Google ScholarWorldCat
p. 345Cowgill, Warren. 1965. Evidence in Greek. Winter, Werner (ed.), Evidence for laryngeals. The Hague: Mouton, 142–80.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cowgill, Warren. 1966. Ancient Greek dialectology in the light of Mycenaean. Birnbaum, Henrik, and Jaan  Puhvel (eds.), Ancient
Indo-European dialects. Berkeley: University of California Press, 77–95.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cowgill, Warren. 1969. On resonant clusters in Ancient Greek. Meeting handbook, 44th Meeting of the Linguistic Society of
America, pp. 22–6.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Cowgill, Warren. 1974a. More evidence for Indo-Hittite: The tense-aspect systems. Heilmann, Luigi (ed.), Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Congress of Linguists, Bologna: Mulino, 557–70.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cowgill, Warren. 1974b. Indo-European languages. The New Encyclopædia Britannica: Macropædia, 15th ed., Vol. 9: 431–8.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Cowgill, Warren. 1979. Anatolian hi-conjugation and Indo-European perfect: Instalment II. Neu and Meid (eds.) 1979: 25–39.
Cowgill, Warren. 1985a. The personal endings of thematic verbs in Indo-European. Schlerath and Rittner (eds.) 1985: 99–108.
Cowgill, Warren. 1985b. PIE  du*ṷo ʻ2ʼ in Germanic and Celtic, and the nom.-acc. dual of non-neuter o-stems. Münchener Studien
zur Sprachwissenscha   46: 13–28.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Cowgill, Warren. 1986. Einleitung. Cowgill and Mayrhofer  1986: 9–71.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Cowgill, Warren. 2006a. The collected writings of Warren Cowgill, ed. Jared   Klein. Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Cowgill, Warren. 2006b. The personal endings of thematic verbs in Indo-European (longer version). Cowgill  2006a: 535–67.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Cowgill, Warren, and Manfred  Mayrhofer. 1986. Indogermanische Grammatik. Band I. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Daux, Georges. 1949. Un règlement cultuel dʼAndros. Hesperia  18: 58–72.
Google ScholarWorldCat
De Decker, Filip. 2018. The augment use of ἔειπε and εἶπε in early epic Greek: An evidential marker?  Symbolae Osloenses  92: 2–


===== PDF PAGE 358 =====
56.
Google ScholarWorldCat
de Vaan, Michiel. 2008. Etymological dictionary of Latin and the other Italic languages. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Debrunner, Albert. 1917. Griechische Wortbildungslehre. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Delfs, Lauren C S  2006. Evidence for the origin of the augment. Paper read at the 25th East Coast Indo-European Conference,
Columbus, OH.
Demiraj, Bardhyl. 1997. Albanische Etymologien. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Denniston, J D  1954. The Greek particles. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Dieu, Éric. 2021. Dérivation nominale et innovations accentuelles en grec ancien. Autour de la loi de Wheeler.
Blanc, Alain, and Isabelle  Boehm (eds.), Dérivation nominale et innovations dans les langues indo-européennes anciennes. Lyon:
MOM Éditions, 255–74.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Dishington, James. 1976. Functions of the Germanic ē-verbs: A clue to their formal prehistory. Language  52: 851–65.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Dubois, Laurent. 1986a. Actualités dialectologiques. Revue de Philologie (3ème série) 60: 99–105.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Dubois, Laurent. 1986b. Recherches sur le dialecte arcadien. I. Grammaire. Louvain-la-Neuve: Cabay.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Dubois, Laurent. 1986c. Recherches sur le dialecte arcadien. II. Corpus dialectal. Louvain-la-Neuve: Cabay.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Dunnett, R  1970. Thessalian κις. Glotta  48: 88–91.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Eichner, Heiner. 1973. Die Etymologie von heth. mehur. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   31: 53–107.
Google ScholarWorldCat
p. 346Eska, Joseph F  1989. Towards an interpretation of the Hispano-Celtic inscription of Botorrita. Innsbruck: Institut für
Sprachwissenscha  der Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Fellner, Hannes. 2021. No deviation from the party(-ciple) line. Paper presented at the 40th (online) East Coast Indo-European
Conference, June 17.
Filos, Panagiotis. The dialectal variety of Epirus. Giannakis et al. (eds.) 2018: 215–47.
Forbes, Kathleen. 1958a. Medial intervocalic -ρσ-, -λσ- in Greek. Glotta  36: 235–72.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Forbes, Kathleen. 1958b. The formation of the so-called Aeolic Optative. Glotta  37: 165–79.


===== PDF PAGE 359 =====
Google ScholarWorldCat
Forbes, Kathleen. 1958c. The relations of the particle ἄν with κε(ν) κα καν. Glotta  37: 179–82.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Forssman, Bernhard. 1969. Nachlese zu ὄσσε. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   25: 39–50.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Forssman, Bernhard. 1975. Zur Lautform der lesbischen Lyrik. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   33: 15–37.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Forssman, Bernhard. 1980. Ein unbekanntes Lautgesetz in der homerischen Sprache? Mayrhofer,
Manfred, Martin Peters, and Oskar E  Pfei er (eds.), Lautgeschichte und Etymologie. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 180–98.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Fortson, Benjamin W IV. 2010. Indo-European language and culture, 2nd ed.  Oxford: Blackwell.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Fortson, Benjamin W  2012. Latin -rier and its Indo-Iranian congeners. Indogermanische Forschungen  117: 75–118.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Francis, E David. 1971. Greek disyllabic roots: The aorist formations. Dissertation, Yale University.
Franciscis, Alfonso de. 1972. Stato e società in Locri Epizefiri. Naples: Libreria Scientifica Editrice.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Frisk, Hjalmar. 1960–76. Griechisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Gamkrelidze, Tamaz, and Vyacheslav  Ivanov. 1973. Sprachtypologie und die Rekonstruktion der gemeinindogermanischen
Verschlüsse. Phonetica  27: 150–6.
Google ScholarWorldCat
García  Ramón, José  Luis. 2018. Ancient Greek dialectology: Old and new questions, recent developments. Giannakis et al. (eds.)
2018: 29–106.
García  Ramón, José  Luis. 2020. Change in grammatical and lexical structures in postclassical Greek: Local dialects and
supradialectal tendencies. Rafiyenko, Dariya, and Ilja A  Seržant (eds.), Postclassical Greek. Berlin: de Gruyter, 303–36.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Gates, H Phelps. 1976. On the chronology of the Attic Rückverwandlung. Glotta  54: 44–52.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Giannakis, Georgios K, Emilio  Crespo, and Panagiotis  Filos (eds.) 2018. Studies in Ancient Greek dialects from central Greece to
the Black Sea. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Gippert, Jost. 2004. Ein Problem der indogermanischen Pronominalflexion. Hyllested et al. (eds.) 2004: 155–65.
Goedegebuure, Petra. 2009. Focus structure and Q-word questions in Hittite. Linguistics  47: 945–69.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Goldsmith, John A  1990. Autosegmental and metrical phonology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 360 =====
Grassmann, Hermann. 1996. Wörterbuch zum Rig-Veda, 6th ed., corrected and augmented by Maria Kozianka. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Gray, Russell D, and Quentin D  Atkinson. 2003. Language-tree divergence times support the Anatolian theory of Indo-European
origin. Nature  426: 435–9.
Google ScholarPubMedWorldCat
Guarducci, Margarita. 1950. Inscriptiones creticae, Vol. 4. Rome: Libreria dello Stato.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Gunkel, Dieter, Joshua T  Katz, Brent  Vine, and Michael  Weiss (eds.) 2016. Sahasram ati srajas: Indo-Iranian and Indo-European
studies in honor of Stephanie W. Jamison. Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 347Gunkel, Dieter, Stephanie W  Jamison, Angelo O  Mercado, and Kazuhiko  Yoshida (eds.) 2018. Vina diem celebrent. Studies in
linguistics and philology in honor of Brent Vine.  Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Haak, Wolfgang, Iosif  Lazaridis, […], and David  Reich. 2015. Massive migration from the steppe was a source for Indo-European
languages in Europe. Nature  522: 207–11.
Google ScholarPubMedWorldCat
Haas, Otto. 1966. Die phrygischen Sprachdenkmäler [= Linguistique balkanique X].  Sofia: Académie Bulgare des Sciences
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hackstein, Olav. 1992. Eine weitere griechisch-tocharische Gleichung. Griechisch πτῆξαι und tocharisch B  pyāktsi. Glotta  70:
136–65.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Hackstein, Olav. 1993. Osttocharische Reflexe grundsprachlicher Präsensbildungen von idg.  ʻerkennenʼ. Meiser, Gerhard
(ed.), Indogermanica et Italica, Festschri  für Helmut Rix zum 65. Geburtstag. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der
Universität Innsbruck, 148–58.
Hackstein, Olav. 1995. Untersuchungen zu den sigmatischen Präsensstammbildungen des Tocharischen. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hackstein, Olav. 2002a. Die Sprachform der homerischen Epen. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hackstein, Olav. 2002b. Uridg.  CH.CC >  C.CC. Historische Sprachforschung  115: 1–22.**
Google ScholarWorldCat
Hackstein, Olav. 2005. Archaismus oder historischer Sprachkontakt. Meiser, Gerhard, and Olav   Hackstein (eds.), Sprachkontakt
und Sprachwandel. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 169–84.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Haegeman, Liliane. 1991. Introduction to government and binding theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hajnal, Ivo. 1995. Studien zum mykenischen Kasussystem. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hajnal, Ivo. 2007. Die Vorgeschichte der griechischen Dialekte. Ein methodischer Rück- und Ausblick. Hajnal (ed.) 2007: 131–56.


===== PDF PAGE 361 =====
Hajnal, Ivo (ed.) 2007. Die altgriechischen Dialekte. Wesen und Werden. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der Universität
Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hale, Mark. 1987. Studies in the comparative syntax of the oldest Indo-Iranian languages. Dissertation, Harvard University.
Hale, Mark. 1994. Rigvedic prosodic structure. Paper read at the 13th East Coast Indo-European Conference, Austin, TX, May 29.
Hamm, Eva-Maria. 1958. Grammatik zu Sappho und Alkaios. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Harðarson, Jón Axel. 1993. Studien zum urindogermanischen Wurzelaorist. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der
Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Harðarson, Jón Axel. 1995. Griechisch τῆλε. Historische Sprachforschung  108: 205–6.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Harðarson, Jón Axel. 1998. Mit dem Su ix  -eh*₁- bzw. *-(e)h₁-i̯e/o- gebildete Verbalstämme im Indogermanischen. Meid, Wolfgang
(ed.), Sprache und Kultur der Indogermanen. Innsbruck: Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenscha , 323–39.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Haug, Dag. 2002. Les phases dʼévolution de la langue épique. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Heidermanns, Frank. 1993. Etymologisches Wörterbuch der germanischen Primäradjektive. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Heisserer, A J  1984. IG XII, 2, 1 (The monetary pact between Mytilene and Phokaia). Zeitschri  für Papyrologie und Epigraphik  55:
115–32.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Heubeck, Alfred. 1956. Ἄρτεμις ἰοχέαιρα. Beiträge zur Namenforschung  7: 275–79.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Heubeck, Alfred. 1979. Remarks on the sign-doublets ro₂, ra₂, ta₂. Risch and Mühlestein (eds.) 1979: 239–57.
Hodot, René. 1990. Le dialecte éolien dʼAsie. Paris: Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hodot, René. 2018. Lesbian, in space, in time, and its uses. Giannakis et al. (eds.) 2018: 457–69.
p. 348Hoenigswald, Henry M  1953. ΡΑ, ΔΕΔΑΕ, ΔΑΣΥΣ, and the semivowels. Language  29: 288–92.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Hoenigswald, Henry M  1960. Language change and linguistic reconstruction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hoenigswald, Henry M  1965. A property of ʻGrassmannʼs lawʼ in Indic. Journal of the American Oriental Society  85: 59–60.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Hoenigswald, Henry M  1985. From plain to worse. Ölberg, Hermann, Gernot  Schmidt, and Heinz  Bothien (eds.),
Sprachwissenscha liche Forschungen. Festschri  für Johann Knobloch. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der Universität
Innsbruck, 167–70.


===== PDF PAGE 362 =====
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Hoenigswald, Henry M  1997. Analogy in Cyrene and elsewhere. Adams (ed.) 1997: 93–8.
Ho mann, Karl. 1955. Ein grundsprachliches Possessivsu ix. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   6: 35–40 [= Ho mann
1976: 378–83].
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ho mann, Karl. 1967a. Der Injunktiv im Veda. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ho mann, Karl. 1967b. Der vedische Prekativtyp yeṣam, jeṣma. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   20: 25–37 [=
Ho mann 1976: 465–74].
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ho mann, Karl. 1976. Aufsätze zur Indoiranistik. Band 2, ed. J. Narten. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ho mann, Otto. 1900. Zwei neue arkadische Inschri en. Philologus  59: 201–5.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ho ner, Harry A, and H  Craig Melchert. 2008. A grammar of the Hittite language. Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Holleaux, Maurice. 1897. Questions épigraphiques. Revue des Études Grecques  10: 24–57.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Hollenbaugh, Ian. 2018. Re-evaluating the evidence of the  and Homer and its implications for PIE. Indo-European
Linguistics  6: 1–68.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Hyllested, Adam, Anders R  Jørgensen, Jenny   H Larsson, and Thomas  Olander (eds.) 2004. Per Aspera ad Asteriscos. Studia
Indogermanica in honorem Jens Elmegård Rasmussen. Innsbruck: Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenscha .
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Inscriptiones Graecae. IV.  1902. Aeginae Pityonesi Cecryphaliae Argolidis, ed. Maximilian  Fraenkel. Berlin: Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Inscriptiones Graecae. V-2.  1913. Arcadiae, ed. Friedrich Hiller  von Gaertringen. Berlin: Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Inscriptiones Graecae. VII.  1892. Megaridis Oropiae Boeotiae, ed. Wilhelm  Dittenberger. Berlin: Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Inscriptiones Graecae. IX-1.  1897. Phocidis Locridis Aetoliae Acarnaniae insularum Maris Ionii, ed. Wilhelm  Dittenberger. Berlin:
Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Inscriptiones Graecae. XII-2.  1899. Lesbi Nesi Tenedi, ed. William R  Paton. Berlin: Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Inscriptiones Graecae. XII-3.  1898. Insularum Symes … Cimoli, ed. Friedrich Hiller  von Gaertringen. Berlin: Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 363 =====
Inscriptiones Graecae, Editio Minor. IX-1.  1932. Aetoliae, ed. Günther  Kla enbach. Berlin: Reimer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Jamison, Stephanie W  1979. The case of the agent in Indo-European. Die Sprache  25: 129–42.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Janko, Richard. 1977. A note on the date of Grassmannʼs Law in Greek. Glotta  55: 1–2.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Janko, Richard. 2018. The Greek dialects in the palatial and post-palatial late Bronze Age. Giannakis et al. (eds.) 2018: 107–29.
Jasano , Jay H  1976. Gr. ἄμφω, lat. ambō et le mot indoeuropéen pour ʻlʼun et lʼautreʼ. Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique  71:
123–31.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Jasano , Jay H  1986. Old Irish tair ʻcome!ʼ Transactions of the Philological Society  1986: 132–41.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Jasano , Jay H  1987. Some irregular imperatives in Tocharian. Watkins (ed.) 1987: 92–112.
p. 349Jasano , Jay H  1988a. PIE  ʻrecognize, knowʼ. Bammesberger (ed.) 1988: 227–39.
Jasano , Jay H  1988b. The sigmatic aorist in Tocharian and Indo-European. Tocharian and Indo-European Studies  2: 52–76
Google ScholarWorldCat
Jasano , Jay H  1989. Old Irish bé ʻwomanʼ. Ériu  40: 135–41.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Jasano , Jay H  1994. The Brittonic subjunctive and future.  Rasmussen, Jens Elmegård, and B  Nielsen (eds.), In honorem Holger
Pedersen. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 199–220.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Jasano , Jay H  1997. An Italo-Celtic isogloss: The 3pl. mediopassive in  -ntro. Adams (ed.) 1997: I: 146–61.*
Jasano , Jay H  2002. The nom. sg. of Germanic n-stems. Wedel, Alfred, and Hans-Jörg   Busch (eds.), Verba et litteræ:
Explorations in Germanic languages and German literature. Newark, DE: Linguatext, 31–46.
Jasano , Jay H  2003a. Hittite and the Indo-European verb. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Jasano , Jay H  2003b. A new Indo-Hittite isogloss. Paper read at the 22nd East Coast Indo-European Conference, Harvard, June
12.
Jasano , Jay H  2004. Acute vs. circumflex: Some notes on PIE and post-PIE prosodic phonology. Hyllested et al. (eds.) 2004:
247–55.
Jasano , Jay H  2009.  -bhi,  -bhis,  -ōis: Following the trail of the PIE instrumental plural. ***
Rasmussen, Jens Elmegård, and Thomas  Olander (eds.), Internal reconstruction in Indo-European: methods, results, and
problems. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum, 137–49.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Jasano , Jay H  2018. Palatable thorns. Gunkel et al. (eds.) 2018: 133–40.
Jasano , Jay H, and Joshua  Katz. 2017. A revised history of the Greek pluperfect.


===== PDF PAGE 364 =====
Hajnal, Ivo, Daniel  Kölligan, and Katharina  Zisper (eds.), Miscellanea indogermanica. Festschri  für José Luis García Ramón.
Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen der Universität Innsbruck, 337–51.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Jatteau, Adèle. 2016. Le statut phonologique de lʼ aspiration en grec ancien. Dissertation, Université Paris 8.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Je ery, Lilian Hamilton. 1991. The local scripts of archaic Greece, revised ed.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Joseph, Brian. 1982. Oscan  slaagí-. Glotta  60: 112–15.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Katz, Joshua T  1998. Topics in Indo-European personal pronouns. Dissertation, Harvard University.
Katz, Joshua T  2004. The ʻswimming duckʼ in Greek and Hittite. Penney, John H W. (ed.), Indo-European perspectives: Studies in
honour of Anna Morpurgo Davies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 195–216.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kellens, Jean. 1984. Le verbe avestique. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kim, Ronald. 2000a. ʻTo drinkʼ in Anatolian, Tocharian, and Proto-Indo-European. Historische Sprachwissenscha   113: 151–70.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kim, Ronald. 2000b. Reexamining the prehistory of Tocharian B ʻeweʼ. Tocharian and Indo-European Studies  9: 37–43.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kim, Ronald. 2001. Tocharian B śem ≈ Latin vēnit? Szemerényiʼs Law and  ē in PIE root aorists. Münchener Studien zur*
Sprachwissenscha   61: 119–47.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kim, Ronald. 2003. Uncovering the prehistory of the Tocharian class II preterite. Historische Sprachforschung  116: 190–233.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kim, Ronald. 2007. The Tocharian subjunctive in the light of the h₂e-conjugation model. Nussbaum (ed.) 2007: 185–200.
Kim, Ronald. 2012a. The Indo-European, Anatolian, and Tocharian ʻsecondaryʼ cases in typological perspective.
Cooper, Adam I, Jeremy  Rau, and Michael  Weiss (eds.), Multi nominis grammaticus: Studies in Classical and Indo-European
linguistics in honor of Alan J. Nussbaum. Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press, 121–42.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 350Kim, Ronald. 2012b. The PIE thematic animate accusative plural revisited. Sukač and Šefčík (eds.) 2012: 144–58.
Kim, Ronald. 2014. A tale of two su ixes:  -h*₂-,  -ih*₂-, and the evolution of feminine gender in Indo-European. Neri and
Schuhmann (eds.) 2014: 115–36.
Kim, Ronald, Norbert  Oettinger, Elisabeth  Rieken, and Michael  Weiss (eds.) 2010. Ex Anatolia lux: Anatolian and Indo-European
studies in honor of H. Craig Melchert. Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kimball, Sara. 1987.  H*₃ in Anatolian. Cardona, George, and Norman H  Zide (eds.), Festschri  for Henry Hoenigswald. Tübingen:
Narr, 185–92.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
*


===== PDF PAGE 365 =====
Kimball, Sara. 1988. Analogy, secondary ablaut and  OH2 in Common Greek. Bammesberger (ed.) 1988: 241–56.*
Kimball, Sara. 1991. The origin of the Greek κ-perfect. Glotta  69: 141–53.
Google ScholarWorldCat
King, Robert D  1967. Functional load and sound change. Language  43: 831–52.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kiparsky, Paul. 1982. Explanation in phonology. Dordrecht: Foris.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kiparsky, Paul. 1995. The Indo-European origins of Germanic syntax. Battye, Adrian, and Ian  Roberts (eds.), Clause structure and
language change. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 140–69.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Klein, Jared. 1988. Proto-Indo-European  g iH* w₃- ʻliveʼ and related problems of laryngeals in Greek. Bammesberger (ed.) 1988:
257–79.
Klingenschmitt, Gert. 1975. Tocharisch und Urindigermanisch. Rix (ed.), 1975: 148–63.
Klingenschmitt, Gert. 1982. Das altarmenische Verbum. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kloekhorst, Alwin. 2008. Etymological dictionary of the Hittite inherited lexicon. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kostopoulos, Georgios. 2023. The outcome of  in Greek. Glotta  99: 122–53.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kostopoulos, Georgios. Forthcoming (a). Notes on stop palatalization in Greek. To appear in Revue de Philologie  96.
Kostopoulos, Georgios. Forthcoming (b). Vowel lengthening in Attic primary comparatives. To appear in Harvard Studies in
Classical Philology  113.
Krause, Wolfgang. 1971. Die Sprache der urnordischen Runeninschri en. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kretschmer, Paul. 1892. Zum ionisch-attischen Wandel von ᾱ in η. Zeitschri  für vergleichende Sprachforschung  31: 285–96.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kroch, Anthony. 1989. Reflexes of grammar in patterns of language change. Language Variation and Change  1: 199–244.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kuiper, F B J  1947. Traces of laryngeals in Vedic Sanskrit. India antiqua: A volume of oriental studies presented by his friends and
pupils to Jean Philippe Vogel, C.I.E. on the occasion of the fi ieth anniversary of his doctorate. Leyden: Kern Institute, 198–212.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kuiper, F B J  1961. Zur kompositionellen Kürzung im Sanskrit. Die Sprache  7: 14–31.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Kümmel, Martin Joachim. 1998. Wurzelpräsens neben Wurzelaorist im Indogermanischen. Historische Sprachforschung  111:
191–208.
Google ScholarWorldCat


===== PDF PAGE 366 =====
Kümmel, Martin Joachim. 2000. Das Perfekt im Indoiranischen. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kümmel, Martin Joachim. 2007. Konsonantenwandel. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kümmel, Martin Joachim. 2012. Typology and reconstruction.  Nielsen Whitehead, Benedicte, et al. (eds.), The sound of Indo-
European. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum, 291–329.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Kümmel, Martin Joachim. 2020. The development of the perfect within IE verbal systems: an overview.
Crellin, Robert, and Thomas  Jügel (eds.), Perfects in Indo-European languages and beyond. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 15–47.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 351Labov, William. 1994. Principles of linguistic change, Vol. I: Internal factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Lambert, Pierre-Yves. 2002. Recueil des inscriptions gauloises. Vol. II, fasc. 2. Textes gallo-latin sur instrumentum. Paris: CNRS.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Lejeune, Michel. 1972. Phonétique historique du mycénien et du grec ancien. Paris: Klincksieck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Liddell, Henry George, and Robert  Scott. 1940. A Greek-English lexicon, 9th ed., revised by
Henry Stuart  Jones and Roderick  McKenzie. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Lindeman, Frederik Otto. 1965. La loi de Sievers et le début du mot en indo-européen. Norsk Tidsskri  for Sprogvidenskap  20:
38–108.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Lubotsky, Alexander. 1989. Against a Proto-Indo-European phoneme  a. Vennemann, Theo (ed.), The new sound of Indo-*
European (Berlin: de Gruyter) 53–66.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Lühr, Rosemarie. 1984. Reste der athematischen Konjugation in den germanischen Sprachen.
Untermann, Jürgen, and Béla  Brogyanyi (eds.), Das Germanische und die Rekonstruktion der indogermanischen Grundsprache.
Amsterdam: Benjamins, 25–90.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Lundquist, Jesse. 2015. On the accentuation of Vedic -ti-abstracts: Evidence for accentual change. Indo-European Linguistics  3:
42–72.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Lüttel, Verena. 1981. Κάς und καί. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Macdonell, Arthur Anthony. 1910. Vedic grammar. Strassburg: Trübner.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Mair, Victor (ed.) 1998. The bronze age and early iron age peoples of eastern Central Asia. Washington: Institute for the Study of
Man.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Mallory, James P, and Doublas Q  Adams. 2006. The Oxford introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European


===== PDF PAGE 367 =====
world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Malzahn, Melanie. 2010. The Tocharian verbal system. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Masson, Olivier. 1961. Les inscriptions chypriotes syllabiques. Paris: Boccard.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Masson, Olivier. 1978. La forme verbale ἦς ʻeratʼ dans les dialectes grecs. Étrennes de septantaine. Travaux de linguistique et de
grammaire comparée o erts à Michel Lejeune par un groupe de ses élèves. Paris: Klincksieck, 123–8.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1982. Über griechische Vokalprothese, Laryngaltheorie und externe Rekonstruktion. Tischler (ed.) 1982:
177–92.
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1983. Ergebnisse einer Überprüfung des indogermanischen Ansatzes ʻThornʼ. Anzeiger der phil.-hist. Klasse
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenscha en  119: 240–55.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1986. Lautlehre (segmentale Phonologie des Indogermanischen). Cowgill and Mayrhofer 1986: 73–216.
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1986–2001. Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindoarischen. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1989. Vorgeschichte der iranischen Sprachen; Uriranisch. Schmidt, Rüdiger (ed.), Compendium linguarum
iranicarum. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 4–24.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Mayrhofer, Manfred, Martin  Peters, and Oskar E  Pfei er (eds.) 1980. Lautgeschichte und Etymologie. Wiesbaden: Reichert
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
McCone, Kim. 1991. The Indo-European origins of the Old Irish nasal presents, subjunctives, and futures. Innsbruck: Institut für
Sprachwissenscha  der Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Meid, Wolfgang. 1987. Germanische oder indogermanische Lautverschiebung?
Bergmann, Rolf, Heinrich  Tiefenbach, and Lothar  Voetz (eds.), Althochdeutsch, Band I. Heidelberg: Winter, 3–11.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Meier-Brügger, Michael. 2005. Sprachkontakte und Sprachwandel beim Zusammenspiel der altgriechischen Dialekte.
Meiser, Gerhard, and Olav  Hackstein (eds.), Sprachkontakt und Sprachwandel. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 437–44.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 352Meier-Brügger, Michael. 2010. Indogermanische Sprachwissenscha , 9th ed.  Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Meissner, Torsten. 2016. Archaeology and the archaeology of the Greek language: on the origin of the Greek nouns in -εύς.
Bintli , John L, and Keith  Rutter (eds.), The archaeology of Greece and Rome: studies in honour of Anthony Snodgrass. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 22–30.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Meister, Karl. 1921. Die homerische Kunstsprache. Leipzig: Teubner.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 368 =====
Melchert, H Craig. 1987. PIE velars in Luvian. Watkins (ed.) 1987: 182–204.
Melchert, H  1994a. Anatolian historical phonology. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Melchert, H  1994b. The feminine gender in Anatolian. Dunkel, George, et al. (eds.), Früh-, Mittel-, Spätindogermanisch.
Wiesbaden: Reichert, 231–44.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Melchert, H  1997a. Denominative verbs in Anatolian. Disterhe , Dorothy, Martin  Huld, and John  Greppin (eds.), Studies in honor
of Jaan Puhvel. Part one: Ancient languages and philology. Washington: Institute for the Study of Man, 131–8.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Melchert, H  1997b. Traces of a PIE aspectual contrast in Anatolian?  Incontri linguistici  20: 83–92.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Melchert, H  2003. Hittite nominal stems in -anzan-. Tichy, Eva, Dagmar S  Wodtko, and Britta  Irslinger (eds.), Indogermanisches
Nomen. Derivation, Flexion und Ablaut. Bremen: Hempen, 129–39.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Melchert, H  2009. Local adverbs in Hittite: Synchrony and diachrony. Language and Linguistics Compass  3: 607–20.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Melchert, H  2011. The PIE verb for ʻto pourʼ and medial  h*₃ in Anatolian.
Jamison, Stephanie W, H  Craig Melchert, and Brent  Vine (eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd Annual UCLA Indo-European Conference.
Bremen: Hempen, 127–32.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Melchert, H  2012a. Genitive case and possessive adjective in Anatolian. Orioles, V (ed.), Per Roberto Gusmani. Linguistica storica
e teorica. Udine: Forum, 273–86.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Melchert, H  2012b. Luvo-Lycian dorsal stops revisited. Sukač and Šefčik (eds.) 2012: 206–18.
Melchert, H  2014a. ʻNarten formationsʼ versus ʻNarten rootsʼ. Indogermanische Forschungen  119: 251–8.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Melchert, H  2014b. PIE  -eh*₂ as an ʻindividualizingʼ su ix and the feminine gender. Neri and Schuhmann (eds.) 2014: 257–71.
Melchert, H  2016. The case of the agent in Anatolian and Proto-Indo-European. Gunkel et al. 2016: 239–49.
Melchert, H  Craig, and Norbert  Oettinger. 2009. Ablativ und Instrumental im Hethitischen und Indogermanischen. Ein Beitrag
zur relativen Chronologie. Incontri Linguistici  32: 53–73.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Méndez Dosuna, Julián. 1985. Los dialectos dorios del noroeste. Gramática y estudio dialectal. Salamanca: Universidad de
Salamanca.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Merlingen, Weriand. 1957. Idg. ʻþʼ und Verwandtes. Μνήμης χάριν. Gedenkschri  Paul Kretschmer. Vienna: Wiener
Sprachgesellscha , 49–61.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Merlingen, Weriand. 1962. Zu idg. ʻþʼ. Die Sprache  8: 74–6.


===== PDF PAGE 369 =====
Google ScholarWorldCat
Miller, D Gary. 1976. Liquids plus s in Ancient Greek. Glotta  54: 159–72.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Miller, D Gary. 1977. Was Grassmannʼs Law reordered in Greek?  Zeitschri  für vergleichende Sprachforschung  91: 131–58.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Miller, D Gary. 2014. Ancient Greek dialects and early authors. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Moore, Samuel. 1927. Loss of final n in inflectional syllables of Middle English. Language  3: 232–59.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Morpurgo, Anna. 1961. Il genitivo maschile in -ας. Glotta  39: 93–111.
Google ScholarWorldCat
p. 353Morpurgo Davies, Anna. 1968. The treatment of *r̥ and *l̥ in Mycenaean and Arcado-Cyprian. Atti e Memorie del Primo Congresso
Internazionale di Micenologia. Rome: Ateneo, 791–814.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Morpurgo Davies, Anna. 1976. The -εσσι datives, Aeolic -ss-, and the Lesbian poets. Morpurgo Davies and Meid (eds.) 1976: 181–
97.
Morpurgo Davies, Anna. 1992. Mycenaean, Arcadian, Cyprian and some questions of method in dialectology. Olivier, Jean-Pierre
(ed.), Mykenaïka. Paris: Di usion de Bocard, 415–32.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Morpurgo Davies, Anna, and Wolfgang  Meid (eds.) 1976. Studies in Greek, Italic, and Indo-European linguistics o ered to Leonard
R. Palmer. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der Universität Innsbruck.
Mottausch, K -H  2003. Das thematische Verb im Indogermanischen und seine Verwandten. Historische Sprachforschung  116: 1–
34.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Mühlestein, Hugo. 1958. Einige mykenische Wörter. Museum Helveticum  15: 222–6.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Narten, Johanna. 1964. Die sigmatischen Aoriste im Veda. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Narten, Johanna. 1968. Zum ʻproterodynamischenʼ Wurzelpräsens. Heesterman, J C, Godard H  Schokker, and V I  Subramoniam
(eds.), Pratidānam. The Hague: Mouton, 9–19.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Neri, Sergio. 2003. I sostantivi in -u del gotico. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen der Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Neri, Sergio. 2009. Review of Ringe, Don. From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic (1st ed., 2006), Kratylos  54: 1–13.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Neri, Sergio, and Roland  Schuhmann (eds.) 2014. Studies on the collective and feminine in Indo-European from a diachronic and
typological perspective. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 370 =====
Neu, Erich, and Wolfgang  Meid (eds.) 1979. Hethitisch und Indogermanisch. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der
Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Newton, G  2005. The contribution of the Old Irish verbal system to the reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European syntax. Papers in
Linguistics from the University of Manchester 2005: 95–112.
Nikolaev, Alexander. 2010. Исследования по праиндоевропейской именной морфологии [Studies in Proto-Indo-European
nominal morphology]. St. Petersburg: Nauka.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Nikolaev, Alexander. 2014. Greek εἱαμενή, Vedic yávasa-. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   68: 127–39.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Normier, Rudolf. 1980. Tocharisch ñkät/ñakte ʻGottʼ. Zeitschri  für vergleichende Sprachforschung  94: 251–81.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Noyer, R Rolf. 1997. Features, positions, and a ixes in autonomous morphology. New York: Garland.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Nussbaum, Alan J  1975. -ı̄- in Latin denominative derivation. Watkins (ed.) 1975: 116–61.
Nussbaum, Alan J  1985. The Greek thematic genitive singular—yet again. Paper presented at the 4th East Coast Indo-European
Conference, Cornell University.
Nussbaum, Alan J  1986. Head and horn in Indo-European. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Nussbaum, Alan J  1997. The ʻSaussure e ectʼ in Latin and Italic. Lubotsky, Alexander (ed.), Sound law and analogy. Amsterdam:
Rodopi, 181–203.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Nussbaum, Alan J (ed.) 2007. Verba docentı̄: Studies in historical and Indo-European linguistics presented to Jay H. Jasano . Ann
Arbor: Beech Stave Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Nussbaum, Alan J  2010. PIE -Cmn- and Greek τρᾱνής ʻclearʼ. Kim et al. (eds.) 2010: 269–77.
Nussbaum, Alan J  2014. Feminine, abstract, collective, neuter plural: Some remarks on each (expanded handout). Neri and
Schuhmann (eds.) 2014: 273–306.
p. 354Oettinger, Norbert. 1979. Die Stammbildung des hethitischen Verbums. Nürnberg: Hans Carl.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Olander, Thomas. 2015. Proto-Slavic inflectional morphology. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Olander, Thomas. 2019. Indo-European cladistic nomenclature. Indogermanische Forschungen  124: 231–44.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Olander, Thomas. Forthcoming. To  b or not to  b: Proto-Indo-European  b in a phylogenetic perspective. To appear in***
Historische Sprachforschung.
Ozoliņš, Kaspars. 2015. Revisiting Proto-Indo-European Schwebeablaut. Dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.


===== PDF PAGE 371 =====
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Parker, Holt N  2008. The linguistic case for the Aiolian migration reconsidered. Hesperia  77: 431–64.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Parker, Holt N  2013. Palatalization of labiovelars in Greek. Cooper, Adam I, Jeremy  Rau, and Michael  Weiss (eds.), Multi nominis
grammaticus: Studies in Classical and Indo-European linguistics in honor of Alan J. Nussbaum. Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press, 214–
27.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Peters, Martin. 1976. Attisch .  Die Sprache  22: 157–61.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Peters, Martin. 1980. Untersuchung zur Vertretung der indogermanischen Laryngale im Griechischen. Vienna: Österreichische
Akademie der Wissenscha en.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Peters, Martin. 1991. Ein tocharisches Auslautproblem. Die Sprache  34: 242–4.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Peyrot, Michaël. 2013. The Tocharian subjunctive. Leiden: Brill.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Pinault, Georges-Jean. 1982. A neglected phonetic law: The reduction of the Indo-European laryngeals in internal syllables
before yod. Ahlqvist, Anders (ed.), Papers from the Fi h International Conference on Historical Linguistics. Amsterdam: Benjamins,
265–72.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Pinault, Georges-Jean. 2006a. Retour sur le numéral ʻunʼ en tokharien. Indogermanische Forschungen  111: 71–97.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Pinault, Georges-Jean. 2006b. Sur lʼévolution phonétique tsk > tk en tokharien commun. Münchener Studien zur
Sprachwissenscha   62: 103–56.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Piwowarczyk, Dariusz. 2015. The Proto-Indo-European  -Vts# clusters and the formulation of Szemerényiʼs Law. Indogermanische*
Forschungen  120: 269–78.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Pokorny, Julius. 1959. Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch. Bern: Francke.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Probert, Philomen. 2006a. Ancient Greek accentuation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Probert, Philomen. 2006b. Clause boundaries in Old Hittite relative sentences. Transactions of the Philological Society  104: 17–
83.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Pronk, Tijmen. 2019. Proto-Indo-European.   a. Indo-European Linguistics  7: 122–63.*
Google ScholarWorldCat
Radford, Andrew. 2004. Minimalist syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 372 =====
Randall, W, and H  Jones. 2015. On the early origins of the Germanic preterite presents. Transactions of the Philological Society
 113: 137–76.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Rau, Jeremy. 2018. The genetic subgrouping of the Ancient Greek dialects: Achaean. Gunkel et al. (eds.) 2018: 380–9.
Rau, Jeremy. 2022. The Greek dialects in the 2nd millennium BCE. Part II. Paper read at ECIEC 41, Harvard University.
Renfrew, Colin. 1987. Archaeology and language: The puzzle of Indo-European origins. London: Jonathan Cape.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ridder, André de. 1895. Fouilles dʼOrchomène. Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique  19: 137–224.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Rieken, Elisabeth. 1999a. Untersuchungen zur nominalen Stammbildung des Hethitischen. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Rieken, Elisabeth. 1999b. Zur Verwendung der Konjunktion ta in den hethitischen Texten. Münchener Studien zur
Sprachwissenscha   59: 63–88.
Google ScholarWorldCat
p. 355Ringe, Don. 1984. The perfect tenses in Greek inscriptions. Dissertation, Yale University.
Ringe, Don. 1996. On the chronology of sound changes in Tocharian, Vol. 1. New Haven: American Oriental Society.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don. 1997. On the origin of 3pl. imperative -ντον. Adams (ed.) 1997: 129–43.
Ringe, Don. 2000. Tocharian class II presents and subjunctives and the reconstruction of the Proto-Indo-European verb.
Tocharian and Indo-European Studies  9: 121–42.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ringe, Don. 2001. Review of Rix et al. 2001. Diachronica  18: 184–7.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ringe, Don. 2002. Tocharian B ṣp ʻandʼ. Southern, Mark (ed.), Indo-European perspectives. Washington, DC: Institute for the Study
of Man, 265–6.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don. 2007. Old Latin -minō and ʻanalogyʼ. Nussbaum (ed.) 2007: 301–6.
Ringe, Don. 2010. ʻThornʼ clusters and Indo-European subgrouping. Kim et al. (eds.) 2010: 330–8.
Ringe, Don. 2012. The hi-conjugation as a PIE subjunctive. Hackstein, Olav, and Ronald I  Kim (eds.), Linguistic developments
along the silkroad: Archaism and innovation in Tocharian. Vienna: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenscha en, 121–40.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don. 2016. Phonological rules and dialect geography in Ancient Greek. Gunkel et al. (eds.) 2016: 378–84.
Ringe, Don. 2017. From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic, 2nd ed.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don. 2018. The nature of the South Greek dialect group. Byrd, Andrew Miles, Jessica  DeLisi, and Mark  Wenthe (eds.),
Tavet tat satyam: Studies in honor of Jared S. Klein. Ann Arbor: Beech Stave, 278–83.


===== PDF PAGE 373 =====
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don. 2022. Stative perfects. Scharf, Peter M (ed.), Indian linguistic studies in honor of George Cardona, Vol. II: Historical
linguistics, Vedic, etc. Providence: The Sanskrit Library, 85–98.
Ringe, Don, and Joseph F  Eska. 2013. Historical linguistics: Toward a twenty-first century reintegration. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don, and Ann  Taylor. 2014. The development of Old English. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ringe, Don, Tandy  Warnow, and Ann  Taylor. 2002. Indo-European and computational cladistics. Transactions of the Philological
Society  100: 59–129.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ringe, Don, Tandy  Warnow, Ann  Taylor, Alexander  Michailov, and Libby  Levison.  1998. Computational cladistics and the
position of Tocharian. Mair (ed.) 1998: 391–414.
Risch, Ernst. 1955. Die Gliederung der griechischen Dialekte in neuer Sicht. Museum Helveticum  12: 61–76.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Risch, Ernst. 1962. Das indogermanische Word für ʻhundertʼ. Indogermanische Forschungen  67: 129–41.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Risch, Ernst. 1974. Wortbildung der homerischen Sprache, 2nd ed.  Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Risch, Ernst. 1979. Les consonnes palatalisées dans le grec du IIe millénaire et des premiers siècles du I  millénaire. Risch ander
Mühlestein (eds.) 1979: 267–81.
Risch, Ernst. 1982. Ein Problem des griechischen Verbalparadigmas. Die verschiedenen Formen der 3. Person Plural. Tischler
(ed.) 1982: 321–34.
Risch, Ernst, and Hugo  Mühlestein (eds.) 1979. Colloquium mycenaeum. Neuchâtel: Faculté des Lettres.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Rix, Helmut. 1970. Anlautender Laryngal vor Liquida oder Nasalis sonans im Griechischen. Münchener Studien zur
Sprachwissenscha   27: 79–110.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Rix, Helmut (ed.) 1975. Flexion und Wortbildung. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Rix, Helmut. 1976a. Historische Grammatik des Griechischen. Laut- und Formenlehre. Darmstadt: Wissenscha liche
Buchgesellscha .
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 356Rix, Helmut. 1976b. Die umbrischen Infinitive auf -fi und die urindogermanische Infinitivendung -dʰi̭ōi. Morpurgo Davies and
Meid (eds.) 1976: 319–31.
Rix, Helmut. 1977. Das keltische Verbalsystem auf dem Hintergrund des indo-iranisch- griechischen Rekonstruktionsmodells.
Schmidt, Karl Horst (ed.), Indogermanisch und Keltisch. Wiesbaden: Reichert, 132–58.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 374 =====
Rix, Helmut, et al. 2001. Lexikon der indogermanischen Verben, 2nd ed.  Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ross, Malcolm. 1997. Social networks and kinds of speech-community event. Blench, Roger, and Matthew  Spriggs (eds.),
Archaeology and language, Vol. I: Theoretical and methodological orientations. London: Routledge, 209–61.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Ross, Malcolm. 1998. Sequencing and dating linguistic events in Oceania: The linguistics/archaeology interface.
Blench, Roger, and Matthew  Spriggs (eds.), Archaeology and language, Vol. II: Archaeological data and linguistic hypotheses.
London: Routledge, 141–73.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Roth, Catharine P  1990. ʻMixed aoristsʼ in Homeric Greek. New York: Garland.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Rothstein-Dowden, Zachary. 2021. On the numeral cha ʻ6ʼ in Middle and New Indo-Aryan. Paper presented at the 40th (online)
East Coast Indo-European Conference, June 19.
Ruijgh, Cornelis J  1968. Les noms en -won- (-āwon-, -ı̄won-), -uon- en grec alphabétique et en mycénien. Minos  9: 109–55.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Ruijgh, Cornelis J  2007. Lʼévolution des dialectes doriens jusquʼà la koina dorienne. Le système des voyelles longues et la
formation du futur. Hajnal (ed.) 2007: 393–447.
Sacconi, Anna. 1974. Corpus delle iscrizioni in lineare B di Micene. Rome: Ateneo.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Samuels, Bridget D  2017. Vocalic shi s in Attic-Ionic Greek. Papers in Historical Phonology  2: 88–115.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Scarborough, Matthew  Joseph  Charles. 2016. The Aeolic dialects of Ancient Greek: A study in historical dialectology and linguistic
classification. Dissertation, Cambridge University.
Schindler, Jochem. 1967a. Das idg. Wort für ʻErdeʼ und die dentalen Spiranten. Die Sprache  13: 191–205.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1967b. Tocharische Miszellen. Indogermanische Forschungen  72: 239–49.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1967c. Zu hethitisch nekuz.  Zeitschri  für vergleichende Sprachforschung  81: 290–303.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1972a. Lʼapophonie des noms-racines indo-européens. Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique  67: 31–8.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1972b. Das Wurzelnomen im Arischen und Griechischen. Dissertation, University of Würzburg.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Schindler, Jochem. 1975a. Lʼapophonie des thèmes indo-européens en -r/n.  Bulletin de la Société de Linguistique  70: 1–10.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1975b. Zum ablaut der neutralen s-Stämme des Indogermanischen. Rix (ed.) 1975: 259–67.
Schindler, Jochem. 1976. On the Greek type ἱππεύς. Morpurgo Davies and Meid (eds.) 1976: 349–52.


===== PDF PAGE 375 =====
Schindler, Jochem. 1977a. Diachronic and synchronic remarks on Bartholomaeʼs and Grassmannʼs Laws. Watkins, Calvert (ed.),
Indo-European Studies III. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Department of Linguistics, 1–28.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Schindler, Jochem. 1977b. Notizien zum Sieversschen Gesetz. Die Sprache  23: 56–65.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1977c. A thorny problem. Die Sprache  23: 25–35.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schindler, Jochem. 1980. Zur Herkun  der altindischen cvi-Bildungenʼ. Mayrhofer et al. (eds.) 1980: 386–93.
p. 357Schlerath, Bernfried, and Veronika  Rittner (eds.) 1985. Grammatische Kategorien. Funktion und Geschichte. Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Schmidt, Klaus T, and Werner  Winter  1992. Die Formen der 1. Singular Aktiv der unerweiterten Präterita in Tocharisch B.
Historische Sprachforschung  105: 50–6.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schmitt, Rüdiger. 1981. Grammatik des Klassisch-Armenischen. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der Universität
Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Schrijver, Peter. 2006. Review of Meiser, Gerhard, Veni vidi vici (Munich 2003: Beck), Kratylos  51: 46–54.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schulze, Wilhelm. 1936. Griech. ὦμος. Zeitschri  für vergleichende Sprachforschung  63: 28.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Schwyzer, Eduard. 1923. Dialectorum graecarum exempla epigraphica potiora. Leipzig: Hirzel.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Schwyzer, Eduard. 1939. Griechische Grammatik. I. Band. Munich: Beck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Seebold, Elmar. 1967. Sind got. nawis und sutis i-stämmige Adjektive?, Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und
Literatur (Tübingen) 89: 42–53.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Seebold, Elmar. 1972. Das System der indogermanischen Halbvokale. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Seiler, Hansjakob. 1950. Die primären griechischen Steigerungsformen. Hamburg: Hansischer Gildenverlag.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Sievers. Eduard. 1893. Altgermanische Metrik. Halle: Niemeyer.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Sihler, Andrew. 1995. New comparative grammar of Greek and Latin. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Skelton, Christina Michelle. 2015. Borrowing, character weighting, and preliminary cluster analysis in a phylogenetic analysis of
the Ancient Greek dialects. Indo-European Linguistics  3: 84–117.
Google ScholarWorldCat


===== PDF PAGE 376 =====
Skelton, Christina Michelle. 2022. Further thoughts on the reflex of syllabic nasals in Mycenaean Greek.
Méndez   Dosuna, Julián, Thomas  G  Palaima, and C V  García (eds.), TA-U-RO-QO-RO: Studies in Mycenaean texts, language, and
culture in honor of José Luis Melena Jiménez. Washington: Center for Hellenic Studies, 221–9.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Smyth, Herbert Weir. 1894. The sounds and inflections of the Greek dialects: Ionic. New York: MacMillan.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Smyth, Herbert Weir. 1956. Greek grammar, revised by Gordon Messing. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Southern, Mark R V  1999. Sub-grammatical survival: Indo-European s-mobile and its regeneration in Germanic. Washington, DC:
Institute for the Study of Man.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Sowa, W  2007. Anmerkungen zum Verbalsystem des Phrygischen. Indogermanische Forschungen  112: 69–95.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Stang, Christian. 1974. Ieur.  swad-/ swād-. Norsk Tidsskri  for Sprogvidenskap  28: 99–101.**
Google ScholarWorldCat
Strunk, Klaus. 1967. Nasalpräsentien und Aoriste. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Strunk, Klaus. 1985. Flexionskategorien mit akrostatischem Akzent und die sigmatischen Aoriste. Schlerath and Rittner (eds.)
1985: 489–514.
Sturm, Julia. 2018. ἵστωρ and ἑορτή: The (Attic-Ionic) rough-breathing reflex of Greek *u̯.
Goldstein, David M, Stephanie W  Jamison, and Brent  Vine (eds.), Proceedings of the 28th Annual UCLA Indo-European
Conference. Bremen: Hempen, 267–76.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Sukač, Roman, and Ondřej  Šefčík (eds.) 2012. The sound of Indo-European 2. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Supplementum epigraphicum graecum. 2. 1925, ed. P  Roussel et al. Leiden: Sijtho .
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Supplementum epigraphicum graecum. 9. 1938, ed. J J E  Hondius. Leiden: Sijtho .
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Supplementum epigraphicum graecum. 24. 1969, ed. A G  Woodhead. Leiden: Sijtho .
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 358Surendran, Dinoj, and Partha  Niyogi. 2006. Quantifying the functional load of phonemic oppositions, distinctive features, and
suprasegmentals. Thomsen, Ole Nedergaard (ed.), Competing models of linguistic change: Evolution and beyond. Amsterdam:
Benjamins, 43–58.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1960. Studies in the Indo-European system of numerals. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1966a. The development of the -o-/-ā- stems in the light of the Mycenaean evidence. Colloquium on
Mycenaean Studies  4: 217–25.
Google ScholarWorldCat


===== PDF PAGE 377 =====
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1966b. The origin of the Vedic ʻimperativesʼ in -si. Language  42: 1–6.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1967a. The history of Attic οὖς and some of its compounds. Studi Micenei ed Egeo-Anatolici  3: 47–88.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1967b. The perfect participle active in Mycenaean and Indo-European. Studi Micenei ed Egeo-Anatolici  2: 7–
26.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1968a. The Attic ʻRückverwandlungʼ or atomism and structuralism in action. Studien zur
Sprachwissenscha  und Kulturkunde, Gedenkschri  für Wilhelm Brandenstein. Innsbruck: Institut für Vergleichende
Sprachwissenscha  der Leopold-Franzens-Universität Innsbruck, 139–57.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1968b. The Mycenaean and the historical Greek comparative and their Indo-European background.
Bartoněk, Antonín (ed.), Studia mycenaea. Brno: Universita J. E. Purkyně, 25–36.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1973. Marked-unmarked and a problem of Latin diachrony. Transactions of the Philological Society  1973:
55–74.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1987. Scripta minora, ed. P  Considine and J T  Hooker. Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenscha  der
Universität Innsbruck. [Reprint of all the above articles.]
Szemerényi, Oswald. 1996. Introduction to Indo-European linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Talbert, Richard J A, et al. 2000. Barrington atlas of the Greek and Roman World. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Taylor, Ann. 1990. Clitics and configurationality in Ancient Greek. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Te Riele, Gérard-Jean. 1967. Le grand apaisement dʼAlipheira. Revue Archéologique  1967: 209–24.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Thompson, Rupert J E  1997. Dialects in Mycenaean and Mycenaean among the dialects. Minos  31–2: 313–33.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Thompson, Rupert J E  2008. Mycenaean non-assibilation and its significance for the prehistory of the Greek dialects.
Sacconi, Anna, Maurizio  del Freo, Louis  Godart, and Mario  Negri (eds.), Colloquium Romanum. Pisa: Fabrizio Serra, 753–65.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Threatte, Leslie. 1980. The grammar of Attic inscriptions, Vol. 1: Phonology. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Threatte, Leslie. 1996. The grammar of Attic inscriptions, Vol. 2: Morphology. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Thumb, Albert, and Ernst  Kieckers. 1932. Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte. I. Teil, 2nd ed.  Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Thumb, Albert, and Anton  Scherer. 1959. Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte. 2. Teil, 2nd ed.  Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC


===== PDF PAGE 378 =====
Thurneysen, Rudolf. 1946. A grammar of Old Irish. Dublin: Institute for Advanced Studies.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Tichy, Eva. 1981. ἀνδροτῆτα und die Vorgeschichte des daktylischen Hexameters. Glotta  59: 28–67.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Tichy, Eva. 2006. A survey of Proto-Indo-European. Bremen: Hempen.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
p. 359Tischler, Johann (ed.) 1982. Serta indogermanica. Festschri  für Günter Neumann zum 60. Geburtstag. Innsbruck: Institut für
Sprachwissenscha  der Universität Innsbruck.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Trubetzkoy, Nikolai. 1926. Gedanken über den lateinischen a-Konjunktiv. Festschri  für Paul Kretschmer. Vienna: Deutscher
Verlag für Jugend und Volk, 267–74.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Tucker, Elizabeth. 1981. Greek factitive verbs in -οω, -αινω and -υνω. Transactions of the Philological Society  79: 15–34.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Tucker, R Whitney. 1962. On the dual pronunciation of eta. Transactions of the American Philological Society  93: 490–501.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Van E enterre, Henri, and Pierre  Demargne. 1937. Recherches à Dréros. II. Les inscriptions archaïques. Bulletin de
Correspondance Hellénique  61: 333–48.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Vendryès, Joseph. 1920. Sur les mot attiques qui ont ρη au lieu de ρα. Mémoires de la Société de Linguistique de Paris  22: 64–7.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Vezzosi, Letizia. 2007. Himself: An overview of its uses in Middle English. Mazzon, Gabriella (ed.), Studies in Middle English forms
and meanings. Frankfurt: Peter Lang, 239–56.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Vine, Brent. 1988. Review of Tamaz Gamkrelidze and Vyacheslav Ivanov, Индоевропейский язык и индоевропейцы (Tbilisi
1984: University of Tbilisi Press). Language  64: 396–402.
Vine, Brent. 1999. On ʻCowgillʼs Lawʼ in Greek. Eichner, Heiner, Hans Christian  Luschützky, and Velizar  Sadovski (eds.),
Compositiones indogermanicae. In memoriam Jochem Schindler. Prague: Enigma, 555–600.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Vine, Brent. 2006. On ʻThurneysen-Havetʼs Lawʼ in Latin and Italic. Historische Sprachforschung  119: 211–49.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Wackernagel, Jacob. 1888. Miscellen zur griechischen Grammatik 12. Über die Behandlung von s in Verbindung mit r, l, n, m.
 Zeitschri  für vergleichende Sprachforschung  29: 124–37.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Wackernagel, Jacob. 1895. Miscellen zur griechischen Grammatik 23. Das Reflexivum. Zeitschri  für vergleichende
Sprachforschung  33: 2–21.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Wackernagel, Jacob. 1904. Studien zum griechischen Perfectum. Programm zur akademischen Preis- verteilung. Göttingen:
Universität Göttingen, 3–32. [Reprinted in Kleine Schri en von Jacob Wackernagel. 1953. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,
1000–21.]


===== PDF PAGE 379 =====
Wackernagel, Jacob. 1916. Sprachliche Untersuchungen zu Homer. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Walkden, George. 2014. Syntactic reconstruction and Proto-Germanic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Wathelet, Paul. 1966. La coupe syllabique et les liquides voyelles dans la tradition formulaire de lʼ épopée grecque. Lebrun, Yvan
(ed.), Linguistic Research in Belgium. Wetteren: Universa, 145–73.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Watkins, Calvert. 1969. Indogermanische Grammatik. Band III. Formenlehre. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Watkins, Calvert (ed.) 1975. Indo-European Studies II. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Department of Linguistics.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Watkins, Calvert. 1987. Studies in Memory of Warren Cowgill. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Weiss, Michael. 1993. Studies in Italic Nominal Morphology. Dissertation, Cornell University.
Weiss, Michael. 1995. Life everlasting: Latin iūgis ʻeverflowingʼ, Greek ὑγιής ʻhealthyʼ, Gothic ajukdūþs ʻeternityʼ and Avestan
yauuaēǰı̄- ʻliving foreverʼ. Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenscha   55: 131–56.
Google ScholarWorldCat
p. 360Weiss, Michael. 1996. Greek μυρίος ʻcountlessʼ, Hittite mūri- ʻbunch (of fruit)ʼ. Historische Sprachforschung  109: 199–214.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Weiss, Michael. 2012. Italo-Celtica: Linguistic and cultural points of contact between Italic and Celtic.
Jamison, Stephanie W, H Craig  Melchert, and Brent  Vine (eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual UCLA Indo-European Conference.
Bremen: Hempen, 151–73.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Weiss, Michael. 2016. ʻSleepʼ in Latin and Indo-European: On the non-verbal origin of Latin sōpiō. Gunkel et al. (eds.) 2016: 470–
85.
Whitney, William Dwight. 1889. A Sanskrit grammar. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Willi, Andreas. 1999. Zur Verwendung und Etymologie von griechisch ἐρι-. Historische Sprachforschung  112: 86–100.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Willi, Andreas. 2018. Origins of the Greek verb. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Winter, Werner. 1962. Die Vertretung indogermanischer Dentale im Tocharischen. Indogermanische Forschungen  67: 16–35.
Google ScholarWorldCat
Winter, Werner. 1998. Lexical Archaisms in the Tocharian Languages. Mair (ed.) 1998: 347–57.
Wodtko, Dagmar S, Britta  Irslinger, and Carolin  Schneider. 2008. Nomina im indogermanischen Lexikon. Heidelberg: Winter.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Yakubovich, Ilya. 2009. Sociolinguistics of the Luvian language. Leiden: Brill.


===== PDF PAGE 380 =====
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Yang, Charles. 2002. Knowledge and learning in natural language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Google ScholarGoogle PreviewWorldCatCOPAC
Zerdin, Jason. 2000. Studies in the Ancient Greek verbs in -skō. Dissertation, University of Oxford.


===== PDF PAGE 381 =====
The Linguistic Roots of Ancient Greek
Don Ringe
https://doi.org/10.1093/9780191989162.0
01.0001
Published: 2024 Online ISBN:
9780191989162 Print ISBN:
9780198879022
Search in this book
END MATTER
Index 
Published: March 2024
Subject:  Historical and Diachronic Linguistics, Classical Languages
Collection:  Oxford Scholarship Online


===== PDF PAGE 382 =====
361Index
Digamma is alphabetized separately, but the lone qoppa-initial form is listed under kappa; Arkadian ͷ is
placed at the end of the alphabet. Forms of each word are normally combined in a single entry, so that some
knowledge of Greek grammar is needed to use this index. However, when di erent dialect forms are spelled
with di erent initial letters or diphthongs, they are listed separately so as to make them easier to  nd. The
citation form of a verb is usually its (present) in nitive if it is referenced in the text, but οἶδα is listed under
the pf. indic. 1sg. because of its extensive word-initial ablaut. Derivationally related words are occasionally
listed together if citations are very few. In ectional endings are not routinely listed; see the relevant
sections (4.2.6, 4.2.7, 4.2.8, 4.3.1, 4.3.5, 5.3.2 (active in nitives and 1pl.), 5.4.2 (i), (ii), 6.3). Cyprian and
Mycenaean forms are listed separately at the end.
ἀ- ‘un-’ 113
ἁ113, 131
-α (acc. sg.) 113
ἀβροτάξομεν291, 295
ἀβρότη291
ἀγαθός341
Ἀγαμέμνων336
ἀγάννιφος134, 336
ἄγασθαι175
ἀγγέλλɛ̄ν, ἄγγελος159, 194
ἄγɛ̄ν186, 209, 276, 277, 278, 16, 89, 272, 91, 227, 300, 209
ἀγɛ̄́ρɛ̄ν, ἀγρέσθαι, ἀγέροντο207, 225, 289
ἀγήνωρ93
ἀγκοίνηισι161
ἄγκος89, 245
ἀγκύλη241
ἀγκύλος89, 170, 252
ἀγκών161, 236, 246
ἁγνός19, 107, 251
ἀγ- ‘break’: ἐᾱγέναι219, 305
ἀγορεύɛ̄ν, ἀγορή199
ἀγρός80, 239, 80
ἄγχɛ̄ν127, 128, 186, 212
ἄγχι, ἆσσον155
-άδᾱς337
ἀδεαλτώhαιε326
ἀδελφεός, ἀδελφός147
ἀδήν283
ἀδικέντα, ἀδικήμενος295
῎ᾱδομαι296
῾ᾱδύς91, 133, 300, 155
ἀέξειν95
ἀɛ̃ραι, ἄερρε267
῾ᾱϝώς95, 245, 267, 301, 308, 95, 267, 308
-αζε/ο- (pres.) 199, 338
ἄησι90, 109, 174, 174
Ἀθήνησι256
ἀθρεόντω325


===== PDF PAGE 383 =====
-αι (aor. opt. 3sg.) 130
-ᾱι, -ηι (dat. sg.) 91, 300, 169
αἰ ‘if’ 279, 334
Αἰακίδᾱο308
αἰδώς138, 246, 138
αἰετός, αἰϝετός160
αἴθɛ̄ν94
αἶθος239
αἰλότρια160 fn. 46
αἷμα341
αἰμιόνοις315
-αινε/ο- (pres.) 199, 338
αἰνɛ̃ν, αἶνος196
αἴνυσθαι196, 296
αἰπόλος120
αἱρɛ̃ν296, 329, 321
αἰσθάνεσθαι, αἰσθέσθαι181, 206, 181
ἄϊστος121
αἴσχιον155
αἰτɛ̃ν196
αἰχμᾱ́, αἰχμή293
ἀκλεής, ἀκλεᾶ306, 318
ἄκμητος103, 182, 300
ἄκμων89, 235 (partial paradigm), 246
ἀκοή, ἄκουαι309
ἀκόλουθος113, 147
ἄκος105
p. 362ἀκούɛ̄ν90, 104, 109, 157, 158, 193, 90, 340
ἄκρᾱτος, ἄκρητος103, 251, 300
ἄκρηστον (κ for χ) 321
ἄλγιον155
ἀλέγω109, 186
ἀλέξɛ̄ν109, 223, 34, 97, 211, 223
ἀλκί97, 238
Ἄλκιππος118
ἅλλεσθαι132, 159, 191, 203
ἄλληκτος122, 134
ἀλλοδαπός337
ἄλλος89, 156, 159, 160 fn. 46, 252, 73, 145, 156, 159, 258, 316, 301 with fn.1, 308
ἄλοχος147
ἅλς132, 238, 249
ἀλυκτοπέδηισι122
ἀλύσκων185
ἀλφάνɛ̄ν, ἦλφον206, 284
ἀλφός125, 240
ἁλῶναι, ἁλώμεναι215
ἅμα114, 131
ἄμαθος111, 126, 147, 240, 340
ἆμαρ91, 288, 248, 288


===== PDF PAGE 384 =====
ἁμαρτάνɛ̄ν, ἡμάρτανε181, 206, 105, 181, 206, 289 (2x), 289
῾ᾱμέ139, 141, 266, 311, 266, 311, 266, 259
ἀμείνων154 fn. 42, 298
ἀμέλγɛ̄ν109, 187
᾽ᾱμέρᾱ163, 313
ἄμμος340
ἀμνός239, 282
ἁμόθεν114, 131
ἀμπεληλεῦθεν219
ἀμπεπαλών, ἀνέπαλτο210
ἀμφί97, 125, 333
ἀμφιβρότη291
ἀμφίεπον207
ἀμφιμέμῡκεν208
( )*ἀμφιφορῆϝες249
ἄμφω70, 125, 260, 260
ἄν280, 332, 3, 334
ἀνά333
ἀναβιῶναι153
ἀναγραψάντων, ἀγγραψάντων325, 325, 276
ἄναλτος99
ἄναξ195, 249, 195, 146, 146, 249
ἀνασσέμεν195
-ανε/ο- (pres.) 157, 181
ἀνατέλλɛ̄ν271
ἀνατιθέναι: ἀντίθειτι, ἀντίθεντι272, 277, 276, 204, 322, 204, 301, 321, 295, 327, 296
ἁνδάνɛ̄ν296
ἀνδριάντας313
ἀνδροτῆτα291
ἀνέκραγον208
ἄνεμος99, 105, 111
ἀνεψιός18, 240
ἀνήκοισαν315
ἀνήρ97, 109, 235 (partial paradigm), 247, 339, 109, 97
ἄνθος126, 128, 245
ἄνθρωπος282, 341
ἄνιπτος122, 251
ἀνιστάμεν276
ἀνταποδιδῶσσα315, 321
ἀντί89, 129, 273, 333
ἀντίος252
ἀντιτετάχαται310
ἄνυδρος114
ἀνωφελής105
ἀοσσɛ̃ν121, 136, 156
ἅ[π]ανσαν314
ἅπαξ113
ἀπελήλυθα218, 224, 219, 327
ἄπελος109, 245


===== PDF PAGE 385 =====
῎ᾱπɛ̄ρος156, 240
ἀπέχειν276
ἀπεχθάνεσθαι, ἀπεχθέσθαι181, 207, 181
ἁπλόος, ἁπλõς113, 131
ἀπό333 with fn. 4, 324
ἀπόβλητος103, 282
ἀποδάτταθθαι169
ἀποδόμεν277, 278, 278, 318, 325, 296, 327, 296 fn. 17, 327
ἀποδρᾶναι300, 202
ἀποθνήισκει341
ἀποκτɛ̄́νει340
ἀπολλύναι179, 271, 206, 219, 221
ἀπολογίτταστη169
ἀποπαρδɛ̃ν207
ἀποστᾶμεν276
ἀποσ[τ]ειλάντω325, 267, 322
ἀποτεινύτω180
ἀππᾱσάμενος118
ἀππεισάτου, ἀπυτεισάτω283
p. 363ἀπυκρύπτοισι315
ἀπυλιμπάνω44 fn. 40, 297
ἄπυστος121, 123, 252
ἄρ287
ἀρᾱ́, ᾽ᾱρή304 fn. 5, 317, 317
ἀρᾶσθαι304 fn. 5
ἀραρɛ̃ν, ἄρμενα142, 142, 203, 208, 36 fn. 31, 208
ἀργός79, 97, 250, 97, 79
ἀργυρᾶ302
ἀρείω5 fn. 19
ἀρήγɛ̄ν109
ἀρηΐφατος251
ἀρήν246, 290
ἀρῑθμɛ̃ν, ἀρῑθμός196
῎ᾱριστον121
ἄρκτος21, 97, 116, 239
ἅρμα142, 144
ἄρνυσθαι87, 296, 179, 206
ἀρõν190, 212
ἄροτρον78, 111, 122, 241
ἄρουρα101, 158
ἅρπαξ, ἅρπαγ167, 195
ἁρπάζɛ̄ν167, 195, 167, 295
ἄρσην, ἄρρην246
Ἄρταμις, Ἄρτεμις274, 280, 274
ἄρτι273
ἀρτοκόπος282 fn. 13
ἀρχέκακος336
-ας (acc.pl.) 114, 315
-ᾶς, -ῆς (gen. sg.) 169


===== PDF PAGE 386 =====
ἄσις136, 137
ἀσπερχές147
ἀσπίς337
ἀστεμφής147
ἀστήρ, ἀστέρ109, 236, 247, 339, 236
ἄστυ244
ἄτερ133
-ατι, -ασι (pf. 3pl.) 114, 129, 314, 314
-ατο (mp. 2ary 3pl.) 114
ἄττα20, 89
ἅττα258
ἀτύζεσθαι109, 166, 190
αὐδᾱ́, αὐδή94, 197
αὔδᾱ (iptv. 2sg.) 197
αὕῃ ‘fetch  re’ 191
αὐλός239
αὔξɛ̄ν, αὐξάνɛ̄ν96, 159
αὗος, αὖος266 fn. 2
αὔριον143, 151
αὐτάρ288, 289
ἀϋτμή142
αὐτός250, 335, 335, 258, 322
αὐχήν341
ἀφαιρῖσθαι323
ἀφεύɛ̄ν142
ἄφθιτον113, 116, 251, 282
ἀφιιέναι278, 327
᾽ᾱχήν94
ἄχθεσθαι116
ἄχος245
ἄψινθος342
βάσσων, βάθιστον154
βαίνɛ̄ν115, 160, 190, 282, 202, 282, 283, 202, 202, 310, 144, 202, 310, 144, 225
βάλλɛ̄ν206, 271, 106, 206, 290, 293
βανᾱ́242
βάπτɛ̄ν162, 190, 282
βαρύς79, 96, 253, 282, 290, 96 fn. 4
βασιλεύɛ̄ν199
βασιλεύς145, 199, 282, 308, 308
βάσις78, 243, 274
βάσκɛ̄ν113, 185, 282, 124
βέλεμνα103, 111
βέλλειτει, βείλειτη271
βελόνη293
Βελφοί, Βελφαίō 283
βίᾱ, βίη153, 197, 285
βιᾶσθαι197
βιβᾱ́ς176
βιός ‘bow’ 153, 285


===== PDF PAGE 387 =====
βιῶναι215, 285
βλάβη, βλάπτɛ̄ν162, 215
βλαστάνɛ̄ν, βλαστɛ̃ν181, 206
βλίσσɛ̄ν164, 164, 193
βλώσκɛ̄ν, μολɛ̃ν104, 185, 206, 293
βοᾱ́, βοή, βοᾶν197
βṓλεσθαι270, 284, 270, 294
βōλή, βωλᾱ́270, 270, 320, 322, 323
βουκόλος120
βοῦς145, 249, 282, 282, 249, 282
βραδύς155, 253, 282, 290, 291, 155, 291
βραχῑ́ων155 fn. 43
βραχύς117, 126, 154, 253, 289, 290, 290, 154
βροτός251, 290, 291
βρωτός104, 282
p. 364Βωλαγόρᾱ322
βωμόν322
βωτιάνɛ̄ρα336
γάλα, γάλακτος146, 249, 342
γαμψώνυχες93
γάνυται178
γαστήρ235, 341
γελᾶν195, 4 fn. 40
γέλως, γελω-ε/ο196 fn. 20
γέμɛ̄ν117, 186
γενεαίρ (acc. pl.) 316
γένεθλον147
γένεσις217, 243, 274
γενέτωρ78, 89, 103, 111, 247, 337
γένος78, 89, 117, 135, 234, 239, 245, 89, 135, 235, 245, 89, 135, 245
γένυς244
γεροντεύων321
γέρρον241
γέρων293
γεύεσθαι188
γῆ341
γίγνεσθαι, γενέσθαι184, 206, 217, 221, 114, 314, 217
γιγνώσκɛ̄ν44, 105, 185, 185, 44, 91, 105, 202
γλυκύς, γλυκίων, γλύσσονα155
γλύφɛ̄ν189
γλῶττα341
γνωτός105
γόμφος125, 128, 128 fn. 23, 239
γόνος, γονή77
γōνõσθαι197
γόνυ244, 336, 339, 197, 336
γράφɛ̄ν189, 291, 273
γυμνασιαρχέντος295
γυμνός119, 198, 252


===== PDF PAGE 388 =====
γυμνοῦσθαι198
γυνᾱ́119, 242, 119, 242, 339, 242
Γυνόππᾱστος118
δαήμεναι136, 208, 215, 278, 136, 208
δᾱήρ247
δαίδαλος, δαιδάλλɛ̄ν159
δαΐδες337
δαιμόνιος156
δάκνɛ̄ν157, 182, 206, 338, 182, 206
δάκρυ244
δᾱμιοργίσōσα294
δάμνησι, δάμνατο177, 223, 177, 223, 114, 223
δᾱ́μου322
δᾱμοσιῶμεν321
δαπάνη19, 114, 154, 182, 242
δασύς137, 253
δατέονται, δατɛ̃θθαι, δάσσασθαι ~ δάσασθαι, δάσασσθαι169
δαυλός137
δέ334
δέατ’, δέᾱτοι175
δείδω217, 221, 221, 317, 317, 217, 314
δεικνύναι179, 36, 211
Δεινοδίκηο301 with fn. 1, 308
δέκα113
δεκάδ337
δέκεσθαι175, 199, 297, 175, 175, 297, 175 with fn. 1
δέκτρια101
δείληται, δήληται, δήλωνται271, 321
Δελφοί283
δελφῡ́ς147, 283
δέμας103
δεμɛ̃ν224
δɛ̃ν ‘to tie’ 190
δένδρον340
δεξιός21, 252
δεξιτερός252
δέρɛ̄ν186
δερϝᾱν, δɛ̄ρή, δέρη304, 317, 317
δέρκεσθαι188, 291, 207, 291, 218, 291, 218
δεσπότης84
δήεις223
δήϊος, δηϊόων198
δηκνύμενος (δεικνύμενος) 179
δημός341
διά333
δ[ι]αβωλευσάμινος320
διαγνόντω325
δ]ιαδέξειε326
διᾱκάτιαι273


===== PDF PAGE 389 =====
διακωλῡ́σει326
διεμέτρεον196
διασκιδνᾶσιν177
δίδαξε208
δίδη176
διδόναι112 fn. 15, 276, 329, 277, 278, 91, 129, 176, 272, 272, 91, 112, 176, 272, 339, 272, 99, 112, 129, 276, 276,
278, 203–4, 320, 275, 325, 220, 327, 327, 320
Διειτρέφης234 fn. 47
p. 365Διείφιλος234
δίενται175
διεσσείλθεικε219, 327
δίζηαι167, 176, 167
διηνεκής110
δικάζɛ̄ν, δικάσαι167, 169, 167, 169, 279, 226, 322, 326, 315
δῑ́νη285
Διονῡ́σω321
δῖος80, 269
δίς153
δισσός, διττός, δίχα163
διψῆν, διψᾱ́ων198
διώρυχ163
δοκɛ̃ν199, 214, 225
δολιχός106, 250, 253
δόλος239
δōλοσύνη337
δόρυ244
δοτήρ78, 337
ἔδραθε181, 206
δράκων291
δραμɛ̃ν206
δραχ-, δαρχμάς289, 312, 313, 315
δρομέανς314
-δυ324
δύνασθαι178, 326
δύο153, 260, 339, 153, 260, 260
δώδεκα153
δῶρα320
ἕ260, 335, 133, 335
ἔαρ ‘blood’ 142
ἔαρ ‘spring’ 143, 248, 288, 248
ἐγδικαξῆται321
ἐγδόμεν277
ἐγɛ̄́ρɛ̄ν108, 104, 108, 206, 218, 90, 108, 218, 218, 206
ἐγκέκλιται222
ἔγκτησις118
ἐγώ259 (paradigm), 339, 75, 335, 258
ἑδ- ‘sit’ 151
ἔδεθλον147
ἔδμεναι89, 174, 278, 224 fn. 43


===== PDF PAGE 390 =====
ἕδος131, 147, 245
ἕδρᾱ, ἕδρη305
ἐέργɛ̄ν108
ἐέρση108, 140
ἥσσαντο ‘they installed’ 322
ἐθέλοισα315
-ει (pres. indic. 3sg.) 129
-ει (pres. subj. 3sg.) 130
εἰ, ἠ, ἐᾱ́ν, ἤν, εἰκ280, 334
εἱαμενή107
-ειας, -ειαν326
εἱβᾱτᾶ320
εἴκοσι273 (2x)
εἰκοίστᾱι312
εἰνατέρες107, 247
εἴνατος317
εἰπɛ̃ν284, 36, 208
ἑκατόν113
ἔκβασις243
ἐκγεγαώς115, 217
ἐκεῖ320, 340
ἐκɛ̃νος340, 258
ἐκεχɛ̄ρίᾱ147
h͜εκηβόλōι301
ἐκθέμειν277
ἐκκόψει (subj.) 225
ἐκλέλαθον210
ἐκτεθήκανθι327
ἑκυρᾱ́133, 240, 243
ἑκυρός133, 239
ἑκών187, 315
ἐλαύνɛ̄ν, ἐλάσαι158, 224
ἐλαφρός20, 108, 114, 127, 250, 282
ἐλαχύς20, 108, 114, 117, 121, 127, 253, 121, 154, 5 fn. 19
ἐλέγχɛ̄ν108, 187
ἑλɛ̃ν207, 168
ἔλεος104
ἐλευθερõν35
ἐλεύθερος108, 126, 251, 313, 314, 315
ἐλεύσεσθαι224, 36, 91, 126, 204, 224, 227, 320, 218, 224
ἕλικ163
ἑλισσέμεν, ἑλίττɛ̄ν163, 310
ἕλκɛ̄ν132
ἕλος131, 245
ἐλπίς337
῟εμα139, 142, 151, 247, 266, 266
ἐμός259
ἕσται151, 114, 174
ἐμɛ̃ν192


===== PDF PAGE 391 =====
ἐμμενέν (fut.) 277, ἐμμενέοισι273
ἐμός259
ἐμπίπληθι176
ἐν89, 299, 333, 89
῏ɛναι174, 232–3, 276, 276, 276 (2x), 277, 321 (3x), 322, 276 (3x), 277 (2x), 278, 321, 323, 277, 278, 322, 139,
151, 266, 139, 266, 20, 89, 129, 142, 151, 174, 272, 310, 151, 314, 314, 135, 112, 38, 138, 226, 325, 136, 151, 91,
146, 151, 227, 309, 320, 309, 310, 309, 310 (3x), 184, 108, 135, 100, 108, 114, 135, 164, 318, 294, 321
p. 366ἐνᾱράτιον, ἐνηρόσιον274
ἔνατος317
ἐναῦσαι ‘kindle’ 212
ἐνδεδιωκότα285
ἐνδελεχής106
ἐνεγκɛ̃ν110, 205, 209, 209
ἐνένῑπε, ἠνῑ́παπε211
ἕνη καὶ νέᾱ132, 250
ἐνθῡμήθητι150
ἐνί135 fn. 29
ἐνιαυτός, ἐνιαύσιος, ἐνιαυτίᾱ, ἐνιαύτια274
ἐννέα306
ἔντερα241
Ἐνυμακρατίδᾱς110, 246
ἕξ133, 299, 333
ἐξάγōδι273
ἐξξανακάδ(δ)ɛ̄ν277
ἑξεικάττιοι273
ἑξείκοντα320
ἐξεῖμεν276, 277
ἐξεστρατεύκαντι296
ἐξίμεν277
ἔξω299
ἔοικε, ἔϊκτον, ἐΐκτην217
ἔορες133, 135, 247
ἔπειτα279
ἕπει207, 187, 132
ἐπελήλυθα218
ἐπερωτᾶι, ἐπερωτῆι319
ἕπεσθαι187, 207, 131, 151, 284, 284, 142, 143, 151, 151, 151, 207
ἐπί89, 93, 100, 333
ἐπιάλμενος203
ἐπιβάλλοντανς313 with fn. 1
ἔπιβδαν122
ἐπιδόμεναι278
ἐπέκριννε267
ἐπέλησεν210
ἐπιμελήθην278
ἐπιμεμηνᾱ́καντι296
ἐπιμνᾱ́σθεισα315
ἐπιπτέσθαι207
ἐπιρρόμβεισι273, 315


===== PDF PAGE 392 =====
ἐπίσπενσανς314
ἐπίστασθαι175
ἐπιστολάς313
ἐπιτῡ́φεσθαι, ἐπιτεθῡμμένος150
ἐπ]ομώμοκε327
ἔπος78, 119, 245, 284
ἔππᾱσις118
ἑπτά113, 131
ἐπώνυμος93
ἔρασθαι175
ἠργάσσαντο322
ἔργον78, 241, 320
ἐργώνησας313
ἔρδειν190, 218
ἐρεβεννός140, 266
ἔρεβος108, 245, 284
ἐρέεσθαι ‘ask’, ɛ̄̓ρέσθαι, Att. ἐρέσθαι98, 98, 108, 175, 98 fn. 7
῎ɛ̄ρει ‘says’ 17, 31, 31 fn. 24, 103, 111
ἐρεῖσες (subj.) 225
ἐρείπɛ̄ν108
῎᾽ᾱρɛ̄ν ‘to string’ 133
ἐρέπτεσθαι191, 108, 161
ἐρεσσέμεναι164, 196
ἐρέτης196
ἐρετμόν164, 196
ἐρεύγεσθαι108, 186, 207, 207
ἔρευνα98 fn. 8, 158, 158
ἐρέφɛ̄ν110 fn. 12
᾽ɛ̄ρήνη, εἰρήνᾱ, εἰρήν[ᾱι, εἰ[ρ]ήνᾱι303
ἐρι133
ἐρίζɛ̄ν, ἔρις, ἔριδ195
ἕρματα132
ἕρπɛ̄ν132, 187
ἔρρɛ̄ν165, 192
ἐρρῡτιασμένος274
ἐρυθρός79, 108, 126, 250, 339, 300
ἔρυσθαι175, 225
ἔρχεσθαι185 fn. 6, 339
ἐρωή108, 241
-ες (Kyrenaian aor. subj. 2sg.) 326
᾽ɛ̄ς314, 333, 315, 299, 214 (2x), 313, 299
῟ες ‘one’ 339, 260, 315, 113, 131, 260, 113, 70 fn. 65, 101, 134, 260, 265, 260, 305, 70 fn. 65, 153, 260, 264, 265
ἔσγονος313
ἐσδόμεν277, 314
ἐσέρπεν277
ἐσθίει339
-εσι (i-, u-stem dat. pl.) 237
ἐσλελοίπασι272, 296 fn. 17, 314
ἕσπερος151, 240


===== PDF PAGE 393 =====
ἕσ(σ)ασθαι ‘put on (a garment)’ 212 fn. 39
-εσσι (dat. pl.) 264, 265, 299
ἑσσõσθαι155
ἔσχατος123
p. 367ἔτι129, 273
ἔτος245
εὐ143
εὕɛ̄ν142, 151, 186, 213, 212
-εύɛ̄ν337
εὐεργ[έτας] 313
εὐεργετές295
εὐήνορα248 fn. 53
εὐθυορϝίᾱν317
εὐκλεής, εὐκλεᾶ306, 318
εὐκτά123, 251
ἐϋκτίμενος116, 174
εὐμενέοντες193
εὐορκέντι295
εὐπαρᾱ́ου302
εὐρύς81, 94, 253
ἐΰς143, 253
-εύς, -ῆος/-έος198–9, 249–50, 263, 269, 337
ἐΰτμητος103, 181
ἐϋτρόχοις315
εὔτυκτος123, 251
εὐφραίνɛ̄ν, εὔφρων161, 195
εὔχεσθαι127, 321
ἔφεπε, ἐπισπɛ̃ν207
ἐφεστᾱ́κεον221
ἔχɛ̄ν126, 148, 181, 184, 200, 207, 276, 320, 276, 277, 272, 148, 148, 207
ἐχθαίρɛ̄ν161, 194
ἐχθρός123, 161, 194, 207
῎᾽ᾱωθε218
ἕως ‘dawn’ 95, 140, 151, 245, 267, 301, 308
ἕως ‘until’ 308
ϝάναχς, ϝάνακτι249
ϝαρήν246, 290
-(ϝ)εντ-, -(ϝ)εσσα, -ϝεττα164
ϝέξ133
ϝεξακάτιαι273
ϝέργον241
ϝέρκσιεν326
ϝετίων321
ϝεχέτō 187
ϝhε (῾ϝε), ϝε133
ϝhεδιέστᾱς133 fn. 28
ἔϝιδε205
ϝίσϝος316
ϝῑ́κατι100, 114, 273


===== PDF PAGE 394 =====
ϝοίκω234
ϝεϝῡκονομειόντων318, 327
-(ϝ)οντ- (pf. ptc.) 264, 265, 298
ϝρᾱ́τρᾱ300
ϝρήσῑ320
Ζάκυνθος274, 342, 274
ζειαί158
ζɛ̃ν143, 158
ζευγνύναι179, 278, 158
ζεῦγος158, 245
Ζεύς145, 166, 237 (paradigm), 249, 19, 112, 249
ζυγόν53, 112, 158, 241
ζῡ́μη143, 158
ζώɛ̄ν186
ζώνη143, 158
ζωννύναι179, 158
ζωός100, 186, 252
-ή- (intrans. aor.) 30, 215
ἥβᾱ, ἥβη107, 241, 282, 283, 300
ἥδεσθαι296
ἡδύς91, 133, 253, 300, 155
-ήϝ269
ἠθμός147
ἦθος147
ἠϊκανός142
ἧκα155
ἥλιος132, 142, 324, 339, 132, 142, 324
ἧμαι139, 141, 151, 174, 136, 142
ἦμαρ91, 145, 163, 248, 288
ἡμɛ̃ς311, 339, 139, 141, 311, 311
ἡμέρᾱ151, 163
ἦ (quotative) 146, 174
ἡμι90, 131, 167
ἥμισυς, ἥμισσον, εἵμιττον167
hημίσχοινον321
ἤμορος142
ἠνάτᾱν317, 317, 322
ἡνία, ἡνίαι140, 141
ἧπαρ90, 107, 248, 281, 288, 339, 248, 281
ἤπɛ̄ρος156, 240
-ησι (pres. subj. 3sg.) 130
ἥσσων155, 5 fn. 19
ἦτορ288
ἡττήθητι150
ἠώς95, 140, 141, 142, 245, 267, 301, 308
θαλ-: τέθᾱλεν, τεθηλώς, τεθαλυῖα219, 273
θάμβος128, 148 fn. 36
θανα- ~ θνη341
θάνατος103, 105


===== PDF PAGE 395 =====
p. 368θάπτɛ̄ν, ταφῆναι148, 161
θαρσῡ́νɛ̄ν137
Θεδωρίδᾱο308
θέειον, θεειοῦται197
θέη307 fn. 8
-θεν, -θι (adv.) 150
θέναρ248, 288, 248
θɛ̄νέμεναι119, 127, 192, 208, 283, 192 fn. 15
θεόδοτος112, 251
θεός126, 135, 150, 318, 323
θέρεσθαι127
θερμός127, 252, 339
θέρος245, 284
θέρσος, θάρσος126, 137, 140, 290
θέσις243
θέσσεσθαι189, 284
θέσφατος126, 135, 150, 318
θετός112, 251
-θη- 150, 215–6, -θητι150
θήγɛ̄ν, θᾱ́ξαις, θῶξαι, τέθωκται, τεθωγμένοι219
θηήσαο307
θηητήρ236 fn. 50, 307
θηλυτέρᾱν321
θήρ117, 237, 249, 237
θησαυρῶι323
-θι (iptv. 2sg.) 90
θιγγάνɛ̄ν, θιγɛ̃ν128
θνᾱ́σκɛ̄ν185, 104, 185, 206, 185 fn. 7, 104, 168, 185, 206, 221, 327, 150, 276
θνᾱτός, θνητός103, 300
θοινᾶται, θοινῆται319
Θōκῡδίδης318
θρασύς126, 137, 253, 290
θρᾱ́ττɛ̄ν, τετρᾱχ-, τετρήχει148
θραυσθῆναι150
θρέπτρα123
θρίξ148, 341, 148
θρόμβος128
θρόνος291
θρύπτɛ̄ν, τρυφῆναι148, 162
θρώσκɛ̄ν, θορɛ̃ν104, 185, 206, 293
θυγάτηρ111, 126, 235, 247, 313 with fn. 1
θῦεν277, 314, 272, 148, 148
θῡμός102, 126, 148, 239
θύρᾱ126
θωμός17, 90, 126, 239
-ια, -ιᾱ- (fem.) 157
ἰαύɛ̄ν94, 95, 108
ἰγκεχηρήκοι327
-ίδᾱς, -ίδης337


===== PDF PAGE 396 =====
ἴδην ‘catch sight of’ 320
ἱδρῶν, ἱδρώων195–6 with fn. 20
ἱδρώς133, 195–6
ἰέναι174, 276, 129, 174, 272, 93, 174, 272, 93, 225, 129, 231, 325, 310
ἱερεύɛ̄ν199
ἱερεύς199, 249, 280 fn. 11, 263, 313
῾ῑερῑτεύκατι272
hιεροθυτές313
ἱερός, ἱαρός, ἶρος94, 280, 315
῞ῑετο ‘he strove’ 175, 213
-ιζε/ο- (pres.) 199, 338
ἵζεται34, 184
῞ῑησι93, 100, 176, 100, 106, 176, 203–4
ἰθαρώτεροι94
ἱκᾱ́νɛ̄ν115, 132, 180, 206, 113, 132, 180, 206, 180, 206
-ικός, -ιον (dimin.), -ίσκο337
῎ῑκατι273
῞ῑληθι, ἔλλαθι176
᾽ῑλῡ́ς94
ἱμᾱ́ς, ἱμάντ94, 195
ἱμάσσɛ̄ν195
῾ῑμɛ̄́ρɛ̄ν194, 267, 267
῞ῑμερος194
ἰμφαῖνεν276
-ιος (patronymic) 264, 337
᾽ῑός ‘arrow’ 94, 140
᾽ῑός ‘poison’ 100, 135, 143
᾽ῑοχέαιρα77, 137, 142, 290, 301
Ἱππημολγοί93
ἵππιος194
ἵππος118, 151, 194, 239
᾽ῑρᾱ́νᾱ, ᾽ῑρ]ήνᾱς303, 303 fn. 3
ἰρɛ̄νι303 fn. 3
῎ῑς249, 125, 249
ἴσος, ἶσος316
ἱστάναι210, 276, 176, 34, 176, 34, 99, 98, 272, 38, 276, 91, 112, 146, 202, 300, 202, 325, 220, 327, 339, 220,
142, 220, 220
-ιστο- (sup.) 254
ἴσχɛ̄ν181, 184, 181
᾽ῑχανάᾳ94
ἰχθῦς249, 339
κα280, 332, 334
κᾱδεστάνς313
p. 369καθαίρɛ̄ν194, 315
καθαρός194
καθέρπονσι272
καθεύδει341
κάθηται339
καθιερεύων, κατιαραίων199, 326


===== PDF PAGE 397 =====
καί131 with fn. 25, 263
καίɛ̄ν161, 341, 213
καινός341
κακός155, 163, 197, 155
κάκου (iptv. 2sg.) 197
καλέσαι4 fn. 40, 103, 295, 323
καλϝός, καλός, κᾱλός, κάλος317, 155
καλλιπάρηος302
καλύβη, καλύπτɛ̄ν162
κάματος103, 105
κάμνɛ̄ν157, 182, 206, 182, 206, 221
καπνός341
κάπρος239
κάπτɛ̄ν162, 190
καρδίᾱ137, 249, 291, 339, 291
κάρρων165
κάς131, 263, 275
κασίγνητος103, 131, 217, 251, 274, 320, 274, 131, 274, 301
-κάσιοι273
κατά233, 333, 324
καταβεβάων327
κα̣[ταβε]βλειώσᾱς327
κατᾱγνύναι179, 225, 305
καταδαρθάνɛ̄ν, καταδαρθɛ̃ν181, 206
καταείνυσαν139, 179
καταλῡμακωθής321
κάταρϝον304 fn. 5, 317
κατατίθεσθαι, καταθίθεθθαι152, 278
καταθένς314
κατεδίκασσαν169
κατεϝέρξοδυ294
κατεληλύθοντος, κατεληλευθυῖα218, 327
κατελίμπανεν297
κατέπηκτο202 fn. 24
κα(τ)θυτάς, κα(τ)θυταίς (acc. pl.) 316
-κάτιοι273
κατοικέντεσσι295
καῦμα161
κε, κεν280, 332, 334
κεῖται117, 174, 339
κέλεσθαι, ἐκέκλετο209
κέλευθος113, 147
κελεύωνσι272, 314
κέλσɛ̄ν224
κεντɛ̃ν312
κεραμεύς249
κέρας245, 339
κέρδιον155
κɛ̄́ρɛ̄ν117, 31, 212


===== PDF PAGE 398 =====
κέσκεον117
κεστός312
κεύθɛ̄ν152
κεφαλή147, 339
κῆνο320
κῆρ ‘heart’ 249, 291
κῆρυξ, κήρῡκ-, κηρῡ́σσɛ̄ν, κηρῡ́ττɛ̄ν163, 195
κίδναται, κεδασα177
κῑ́νυντο, κῑνɛ̃ν178, 206, 206
κίρνη177, 117, 177, 103, 111
κις286
κιχήμεναι150, 176, 180
κιχράναι150, 176, 176
κῑ́ων246
κλέεσθαι188
κλέος78, 117, 245
κλέπτɛ̄ν117, 161, 192, 200, 213, 212, 213
κλητός103
κλῑ́νɛ̄ν180, 222
κλῦθι202, 205, 205
κλυτοτέχνης242
κνῆν, κνῆ190
κοεῖς (2sg.) 200
κόθεν, κοῖος, κόσος, κότε, κότερος, κοῦ, κω, κῶς283
κοθρασίων155 fn. 44
κοινός115, 156, 160, 313
κοίρανος156, 160
κονῑ́ɛ̄ν138
κονιορτός97, 251
κόνις245
-κοντα273, 313
κόπτην278
κορέσαι293
Κόρϝᾱι, κṓρη, κόρη304, 317, 317, 301
κορθύεται, κόρθυς198
Κόρινθος274, 342, 274
κόρυς, κόρυθ164, 195, 274
κορύσσɛ̄ν195, 164
κορυφή, κορυφοῦται197
-κόσιοι273
κοσμɛ̃ν322, 312, 322, 226, 322, 326, 312
κόσμος, κόσμον312
-κοστός, -κοιστος312
p. 370κοῦρος317
κουρωθείει321
κραδίη137, 249, 291
κρᾱ́νᾱ, κρήνη242, 266, 302, 266
κράνεια291
κρατερός92, 137, 291, 137, 291


===== PDF PAGE 399 =====
κρατερώνυχες92
κράτος291
κρατύς154, 164, 253, 290, 154, 164, 164
κρέας111, 245, 339
κρέμαται175, 177, 31
κρημνός145
κρητήρ236 fn. 50
κριμνάντων31, 177, 177, 271
κρῑ́νɛ̄ν, κριννόμεναι180, 267, 180, 267, 277, 267, 325
κροτέοντες200
κρύβδα, κρυπτός, κρυφηδόν123
κτɛ̄́νɛ̄ν179, 329, 179, 116, 205
κτɛ̄́ς, κτεν247
κτη118 with fn. 18
κῡδαίνɛ̄ν, κῡδρός, κῦδος, κῡδι194
κύκλος61, 119, 239, 61, 119
κυνɛ̃ν178
κῡ́ριος118
κύων153, 235, 246, 338, 17, 246
λαγάσαι134, 291
λαγχάνɛ̄ν182, 296, 182, 206, 210, 276, 276, 320, 210, 182
λάζεσθαι121, 167, 207, 284, 296, 296, 296, 277, 296, 121, 134, 167, 207, 284, 276, 233, 134, 207, 327
λαιός252
λάκε208, 208, 219, 219
λανθάνɛ̄ν206, 210
λᾱός308
λέγɛ̄ν117, 186, 340, 202 fn. 24, 186
λειμών, λειμῶν236, 246
λείπɛ̄ν44, 188, 203, 205, 207, 4 fn. 15, 284, 188, 205, 207, 233, 233, 315, 222
λείχɛ̄ν117, 126, 187, 212
λέκτο, λέχεται203
λέκτρον122
λέσχη123 fn. 20
Λεύκιππος118
λευκός340
λέχος122, 123 fn. 20, 127, 147
λέων293
λεώς308
λήγɛ̄ν134
λήθɛ̄ν181, 210, 296, 181, 181, 210
λῆνος110
λίθεος, λίθινος, λίθιος337
λίθος341
λιμήν, λιμέν236, 246
λίμνη236
λιμπάνɛ̄ν183
λίναμαι177
λίσσεσθαι, λιτέσθαι164, 207
λογίζεσθαι, λογίσασθαι169


===== PDF PAGE 400 =====
λόεον, λοέσσομαι, λοέσσαι293
λοετρά, λοετροχόος293
λοῦσσον156
λυγρός250
λύει189, 202
λύκος120, 240
λύχνος293
μά334
μαζός341
μαίνεται115, 160, 194, 215, 36, 115, 217, 217, 115, 217
μαίτυρανς313 with fn. 1, 314
μακών, μεμηκώς208
μᾶκος, μῆκος250 fn. 54
μακρός154, 250, 339, 154
μάλα, μάλλον, μάλιστα154
μαλακός, μαλάσσɛ̄ν, μαλάττɛ̄ν163
μᾶλον, μῆλον241, 249, 342
μᾱλ]ọπάραυε301
μανθάνɛ̄ν182, 206, 296, 182, 206
μάρνασθαι177, 290
μαστός341
μᾱ́τηρ, μήτηρ235, 247, 235 fn. 48
Μhεγαρεύς135 fn. 29
μεγάροισι135 fn. 29
μέγας135 fn. 29, 253, 338, 111, 254, 135 fn. 29, 154, 166, 166, 298, 298, 5 fn. 19
μέθυ126, 244
μείδησε134
μελαίνετο195
μελάνοσσος156
μέλᾱς, μέλαν195, 341
p. 371μέλι146, 249, 164, 249
μενɛ̃ν (fut.) 223, 314
-μενο42 fn. 38
μɛ̄́ρεσθαι134, 290, 134, 161, 222, 290, 289
μέροπες293
μέρη306
μεσαμβρίη145
μέσος156, 165, 252, 275, 165, 275, 320
μετά333
μετασπών207
μέτρον196
μή321, 330, 332
μῆλον ‘small domestic animal’ 241
μήν140, 238 (partial paradigm), 246, 145, 238, 246, 145, 267, 323, 145, 267, 267, 321
μηνίɛ̄ν, μῆνις198
μῆτις243
μήτρως244
μιαίνɛ̄ν, μιαρός194
μῑκρός135 with fn. 29, 341


===== PDF PAGE 401 =====
μίμνει31, 184
μιμνήσκɛ̄ν, μνήσκεται186
μιν260
μίσγɛ̄ν124, 184, 202, 124, 215, 233, 144, 310, 310, 233, 144, 184, 215
μισθός126, 240
μναίς (acc. pl.) 316
μνᾶσθαι186 fn. 8
μνηστῆρες236 fn. 50
μόνος, μόνᾱ, μοῦνος317
μόρος, μοῖρα161
Μροχṓ289
μῡθɛ̃σθαι, μῦθος196
μυῖα138
μῡκώμεναι, μύκον, μεμῡ́κει208
μῦς102, 238, 249
νᾱϝός, νηός267, 301, 308, 267, 308, 138, 267, 301, 308, 322
ναίɛ̄ν138
ναῦς, νᾱός244, 244, 308
ναυτίλος, ναυτίλλεσθαι159
νᾱ́χɛ̄ν, νήχɛ̄ν134, 339
νεᾶν35, 197, 198
νέονται135
νείφɛ̄ν127, 134, 187, 284
νέμɛ̄ν186
νεόδμᾱτος, νεόδμητος103, 300
νέος197, 250, 112, 305
νεότης79
νεῦμα78, 114, 247
νεῦρον134, 145
νεφέλᾱ, νεφέλη125, 242
νέφος125, 245, 338, 14
νεφρός127, 239, 282
νήγρετος104
νήκεστος105
νηκούστησε104
νηλεές104
νῆμα247
νημερτής105, 289
νῆν134, 190, 17, 90
νηνεμίη105
νῆσσα, νῆττα111, 164, 243
νίζɛ̄ν121, 166, 190, 121, 282
νῑ́κᾱ, νῑ́κη93, 100
νῑκᾶν242, 319, 319, 272, 319
Νῑκάνδρη301
-νῑ́κης242
νιν260
νῑ́σοντο, νῑσόμενον184
νίφα127, 134, 248, 282


===== PDF PAGE 402 =====
νιφάδες337
νοɛ̃ν, νόος196
νόσος, νοῦσος317
-ντι129
-ντον (iptv. 3pl.) 145, 324, 324, 324
-νῡ- ~ -νυ- (pres.) 179
νύξ119, 237, 238, 249, 339, 113, 237, 237, 238, 114, 249
νυός134, 135, 240
-ξαι (aor.) 263
ξανθός341
Ξένϝōν317
ξένος, ξεῖνος317
ξηρός341
ξύν115, 156, 333
ξῡνός115, 156
ὁ, ῾ᾱ, ἡ131, 257 (paradigm), 280, 145, 257 (paradigm), 138, 320, 322, 320, 321, 323, 280, 313, 321, 323, 316,
308, 318
-ō, -οιο (gen. sg.) 138
ὀβελοί, ὀβελλός, ὀβολός, ὀδελός284
ὄγκος89, 239
ὄγμος16, 89
ὀδός, ὀδṓς ‘threshold’ 317
ὀδṓς237, 238, 249, 339, 237, 237, 238, 109, 249, 109
ὄζɛ̄ν166
p. 372ὄζις286
ὄζος89, 239
-οι (pres., aor. opt. 3sg.) 130
οἴᾱξ94
οἶδα216, 90, 121, 216, 36, 216, 339, 216, 310, 217, 216, 38, 225, 225, 121, 126, 216, 276, 279, 216, 101, 138, 216
οἴκοι130
οἴμη, οἶμος, οἷμος143 fn. 35
οἴνη70
οἶνος342
οἶος70, 252
ὄϊς89, 243, 112, 314
-οις (inst. pl.) 145, -οῖς169
οἴσɛ̄ν224
ὅκα279
ὀκτακατίᾱς273
ὀκτώ21, 321
ὀλίγος154
ὀλισθάνɛ̄ν, ὀλισθɛ̃ν181 with fn. 4, 206, 181
ὅλος132, 317
ὀμείχɛ̄ν109, 126, 186
ὀμίχλη109, 127, 241
ὄμμασι281
ὀμνύναι179, 278, 279, 320, 225
ὁμός90, 131, 250
ὀμφαλός97, 125


===== PDF PAGE 403 =====
ὀμφή78, 127, 128, 147, 242, 282, 283
ὄναρ109, 156, 248, 109, 156
ὄνειδος109
ὀνίνησι176
ὄνομα110, 236, 246, 339, 110, 120
ὀνομαίνɛ̄ν99, 114, 160, 193
ὄνοσαι175
-οντ- (thematic ptc.), -ōσα164, 314, 164, 314
ὄνυ263
ὄνυξ92, 109, 117, 119, 249, 338
ὄπα ‘voice’ 118, 238, 248, 281, 238
ὀπῑπεύɛ̄ν100
ὀπίσω165, 275
ὅπλα, ὥπλεον196
Ὀπούντιοι323
ὀππάτεσσι281
ō̓ρᾱ́, ō̓ρή141, 142, 340
ὁρᾶν, hορῆν, [ὁ]ρῆι, ὁρῆις319, 319, 341
ō̓ρανός142
ὀρέγɛ̄ν109, 187, 122, 212, 227, 310
ō̓ρɛ̃ν141, 142, 200
ὀρθός168
ὅρμος132
ὄρνῑς89, 340
ὄρνυται179, 97, 340, 202, 205, 205 with fn. 28, 205
ὄρος ‘mountain’ 340
ὀρός ‘whey’ 133
ὅρος ‘boundary’ 151, 317, 317
ὄροφος110 fn. 12
ὄρρος89, 140, 239
ὀρσοπῡ́γιον140
ὀρύσσɛ̄ν, ὀρύττɛ̄ν163
ὀρφανός125
ὄρχις243
ὅς107
῏ος ‘ear’ 140, 142, 245, 336, 339, 170, 245, 336, 170, 245
-ōς (acc. pl.) 314
ὅσος, ὄσσος, ὅσσος, ὄττος165, 275
ὄσσα121
ὄσσε100, 121, 248
ὄσσεσθαι121
ὀστέον, ὀστõν89, 338
-ότ- ~ -υίᾱ- (pf. ptc.) 265
ὅτε, ὄτα279
ὄτῑμι257–8
οὐ341, 120
οὐδενόσωρος93
οὐδός ‘threshold’ 317
οὖθαρ248, 288, 248


===== PDF PAGE 404 =====
οὔκις286
οὔκω, οὔκως283
οὖλος ‘whole’ 317
οὖρος, οὖροι317
οὗτος340, 313
ὀφɛ̄́λɛ̄ν, ὀφɛ̄́λɛ̄ν, ὀφέλλɛ̄ν271, 321, 323, 114, 296 fn. 17, 327, 327
ὄφελος105
ὀφθαλμός121, 281, 340
ὄφις127, 243, 285
ὄφρα149
ὀφρῦς102, 109, 125, 249, 102
ὀχέεσθαι ‘drive’ 199
ὀχέων, ὀχέεσκον ‘endure’ 200, 200 fn. 23
ὄψεσθαι224
ὁͷέοι286
πᾱ118
παϊδ- 167, παισί168
παίζɛ̄ν167
παλάμη105, 242, 112, 300
πανᾱγόρσῑ289
p. 373πανσυδί, παν]σεϝδί163
παρά333
παρασκευάζεσθαι335
παρεᾱ́302, 307 (2x), 307
παρέχειν276, 277, 325
παρθενοπῖπα100
παρθένος: φαρθένō 152
παρίμεν276
παρκέκλεικε327
Παρνασσός342
πᾶς314, 313, 315, 164, 144, 253, 338, 168, 314, 168, 164, 314, 164, 314, 315 fn. 3, 315, 315
πάσσɛ̄ν, πάττɛ̄ν164, 191, 281, 212
πάσχɛ̄ν123, 185, 206, 224, 276, 321, 185, 206, 224, 278, 123, 218, 224, 123, 123, 218, 218
πατήρ90, 111, 169, 235 (paradigm), 247
πάτος340
πάτριος80
πάτρως244
πάχνη, παχνοῦται197
παχύς149, 154, 253, 149, 154
πᾶχυς, πῆχυς91, 146, 244, 300, 112
πεδά333
πεδίον11
πέδον241
πεζός18, 156, 166
πείθɛ̄ν207, 211, 320, 148, 186, 210–11, 148, 207, 211, 211, 148, 148, 211 fn. 34, 217
πειθώ244
πεινῆν, πεινήμεναι, πεινᾱ́ων198
Πεισήνωρ93
Πεισι-, Πειhι168


===== PDF PAGE 405 =====
πέκɛ̄ν117
πέλει188, 4 fn. 11, 188 with fn. 11, 283, 188 fn. 11, 206, 206
πέλεκυς244
Πελοπόννησος, Πέλοπος νῆσος271
πεμπάζεσθαι195, 195 fn. 19
πεμπάς, πεμπάδ195
πεμπεβόηα, πέμπτος283
πενθερός147
(πε)ν(τ)ακάτιας315
πέντε283
πέος135
περαίνɛ̄ν, πɛ̄ραίνɛ̄ν193, 193 fn. 16
πɛ̃ραρ193, 248, 288, 193, 248, 317
πέρδεσθαι186, 207
περί333
περιδώμεθον227
περιτελλόμενος188, 271, 283
περνᾱ́ς, περνάμενα177, 186, 177
περόνη293
πέρυσι129, 273
περυσινός273
πέσσɛ̄ν, πέττɛ̄ν120, 192, 120, 212, 282
πέσσυρες, πέτταρες168, 283
πέτεσθαι186, 207, 339, 241
πετρο283
πεύθεσθαι149, 188, 296, 149, 207, 149
πηγνύναι179, 35, 219, 219, 273
πήλοι283
πικρός250
πίλναται, πελασα177
πιμπλη- ~ πιμπλα176, 273, 202
πῑ́νει338, 203, 205, 224
πιπρᾱ́σκɛ̄ν186
πῑ́πτɛ̄ν, πῖπτε, πῖπτον184, 294
πίσσα, πίττα163
πίστις274
πιστός121, 123, 251
πεπιτευόντεσσι327
πιτνᾱ́ς, πίτναντο, πετασα177
πιφαυσκέμεν, φάε207
πῑ́ων100, 253, 100, 253
Πλάταια96 fn. 4, 100, 290
πλατάνιστος19, 114, 154
πλᾱτίος, πλᾱτίον, πλᾱ́σιον, πλησίος, πλησίον274
πλατύς90, 96, 253, 290, 96 fn. 4, 100
πλείονερ316, 314, 92, 96 fn. 4
πλέκɛ̄ν117, 293
πλɛ̃ν187, 318, 318, 212, 294
πλήμνη145


===== PDF PAGE 406 =====
πλήρης340, 306
πλοῖον160
πλοῦτος, πλούτιος, πλούσιος274
πλοχμός293
πλώɛ̄ν190
πόᾱ, ποίη305
ποθɛ̃ν200
πόθος147, 284
ποί131 fn. 25
p. 374ποιήσει (subj.) 225, 295, 295, 320, 323, 327
ποικίλλɛ̄ν, ποικίλος159, 194
ποιμαίνɛ̄ν193
ποιμήν92, 193, 235 (partial paradigm), 246
ποινή242, 283, 283 fn. 14
πολεμίους323
πολεῖν ‘plow’ 201
πολɛ̃ν ‘traverse’ 201
πόλις106, 263, 236, 263, 308, 236, 308, 263, 308
πολῑτεύονσι314
πολῑ́της337
πόλος239, 283
Πολυκράτιος318
πολύς96, 106, 253, 254, 160 fn. 47, 339
πορɛ̃ν293, 206
πόρρω274, 155
πός ‘towards’ 263, 275 with 5, 334, 275, 334
πṓς237, 248, 339, 237 fn. 51, 113, 237, 237, 248
πόσις243
πόσος156, 165, 275, 281
ποταποπῑσάτω283
ποτᾶσθαι, ποτɛ̃σθαι201
πότερος281
πότνια101, 243, 101 fn. 11
ππᾱ-, τὰ ππᾱ́ματα118
πράσον137, 241, 249, 342
πρᾱσσέμεν277, 225, 325
πρᾱτός ‘sold’ 103, 304
πρᾶτος ‘ rst’ 263
πρίασθαι157, 101, 281, 101, 202
πρό275 fn. 5, 333
προαρχόντων323
Προβάλινθος274, 342, 274
προβεβωλευμένον321
προγεγονοίσαις315
προνοήθην278
πρόξενϝος, πρόξηνονς317, 321
προοίμιον143 fn. 35
πρόστᾱν278
πρός93, 263, 275 with fn. 5, 333, 334, 275, 277 fn. 9, 334, 334


===== PDF PAGE 407 =====
προσέρχεται338
προσεπίλνατο177
πρόσω165, 275
πρόσωπον93, 320 (2x)
προτίθεισι273
πτᾱ́σσɛ̄ν, πτήσσɛ̄ν161, 163
πτάρνυσθαι179, 206, 290, 179, 206
πτέρνη144
πτερόν241, 339
πτύσσɛ̄ν, πτύχες163
πυθμήν128 fn. 23, 147
πυλέων308
πύνδαξ128 fn. 23
πυνθάνεσθαι183, 296 with fn. 18
πῦρ, πυρός238, 248, 339
πυρέσσɛ̄ν, πυρέττɛ̄ν, πυρέξαι, πυρετός164
πυρπολέοντας201
πωλɛ̃ν ‘sell’ 201
πωλɛ̃σθαι ‘go around’ 201
πωτᾶσθαι201
ῥα287
ῥαίνɛ̄ν, ῥανθείς161
ῥαπτός, ῥαφή123
ῥάπτριαι162
ῥέζɛ̄ν ‘to dye’ 190
ῥέζɛ̄ν ‘to sacri ce’ 190 fn. 13
ῥɛ̃ν134, 215
ῥηγνύναι179, 294, 219
ῥητός103, 251
ῥήτρᾱ, ῥήτρην305
ῥῑ́γιον155
ῥῖγος134, 245
ῥῑγῶν196 fn. 20
ῥίζα341
ῥίμφα108
ῥῑ́πτɛ̄ν184
ῥῑ́ς341
ῥοφɛ̃ν134, 200
ῥύπα, ῥυπόω197
ῥῡ́τιον, ῥῡ́σιον, ῥῡσιάζɛ̄ν274
Ῥωμαῖος (acc. pl.) 313
ῥώοντο104, 190
ῥωχμός294
σᾶμα, σῆμα164, 193, 247
σᾱ́μερον, σήμερον163
σαõν198
σᾶτες, σῆτες, σᾱ́ετες163
σατίναις315
σβεννύναι179


===== PDF PAGE 408 =====
σέβεσθαι164, 284, 200
-σέɛ̄ν (fut.) 263
σείɛ̄ν138, 167
σελᾱ́νᾱ266, 301, 266, 301, 341, 266
σέλας266, 301, 341
σεύεσθαι163, 203, 222
σημαίνɛ̄ν193
-σθε40 fn. 36, 168
p. 375σῑγέν277
σκαιός252
σκαπτήρ, σκάφος123
σκελετός, σκέλλɛ̄ν, σκληρός104
σκέλος245
σκέπτεσθαι161, 189, 199, 212
σκιᾱ́242, 305, 305
ἐσκίδναντο, σκεδασα177
σκοπɛ̃ν199
σκότιος156
σκῶρ, σκατός248
σμερδαλέος, σμερδνός134
σμῑκρός135 with fn. 29
σμῡ́χοιτο135
σοβɛ̃ν200
σπένδɛ̄ν188
σπɛ̄́ρɛ̄ν341
σπέρμα114, 341
σπέρχεσθαι127, 147
σσα258
-σσαι (aor.) 263
σταγών, στάζɛ̄ν166
στᾱ́λᾱ, στήλη271, 301, 271
στάσις243, 274
στατός112, 251
σταυρός92, 240
στέγɛ̄ν117, 187
στείχɛ̄ν117, 127, 188
στέλλɛ̄ν159, 189, 267
στɛ̃ρα100
στεῦται174
στίζɛ̄ν166
στόμα236, 246, 339
στορέσαι293, 104, 222
[στρατᾱ]γέντος295
στρατηγός93, 289
στρατός, στρότον289
στρογγύλος341
ἐσστροτεύαθη289
στρωτός104, 251
σύ259 (paradigm), 339, 167, 335


===== PDF PAGE 409 =====
συζευγνύναι313
σῡλᾶν, σῡ]λῆν, σῡλɛ̃ν, σουλεῖμεν319
συμμεννάντουν267
σύν333, 313
-σύνᾱ, -συνος336
συναγόντων324
συναέρραισα267
συνεδρίου322
συνέθεαν295
συνɛ̄́ρɛ̄ν133
σύνες (iptv.) 275
συνθήκᾱ321
σῦς132, 249
συστέλλɛ̄ν313
σφαγή, σφάζɛ̄ν166
σφάλλεσθαι124
σφαραγεῦντο124
σφιν260
σφυρόν124
σφώ259
ἔσχων124
σχίζɛ̄ν124
ταγ167
ταγός (acc. pl.) 313
ταμίᾱο318
τάμνɛ̄ν157, 181, 206, 181, 206
ταναός, τανυ114
τάνυται179
τανύφυλλος253
ταράσσɛ̄ν, ταράττɛ̄ν, ταραχή163
-τᾱς, -της337
τάσσɛ̄ν, τάττɛ̄ν166, 310
-τατο- (sup.) 254
τατός114, 251
ταῦρος240
τάφος ‘astonishment’ 128
ταφών, τέθηπεν148 fn. 36
ταχύς148, 154, 148, 149, 154
τε284
τέγγɛ̄ν187, 212
τείνυται180, 317, 180, 283
τεῖχος, τοῖχος147
τεκμαίρεσθαι, τέκμωρ195
τεκνογόνος77
τεκταίνεσθαι195, 214, 195 fn. 18, 214
τέκτων116, 195, 214
τελαμών103
τελέν277, 323, 195
τέλεονς314


===== PDF PAGE 410 =====
τέλος, τέλε- ‘end’ 195
τέλσον140, 283
τέμει ‘it encounters’, ἔτετμε208
τέμενος103, 181
τεός259
-τέος337
τερέβινθος342
τέρετρον103, 183
τέρμα247, 246
-τερο- (cptv.) 254
τέρπεσθαι188, 205 fn. 30, 207, 290
τέρσεσθαι140, 215
τερψίμβροτος336
τεταγών209 fn. 33
τέταρτος168, 289
τετρα283
p. 376τετραίνɛ̄ν103, 112 fn. 15, 183, 183
τετρακατίαις273
τετρᾱ́ορος93
τέτταρες, τέσσερες168, 261, 283, 168, 261, 263, 283, 261
τεύχɛ̄ν149, 187, 207, 296, 149, 149, 223, 223, 211
τέφρᾱ147, 282, 305, 340
τέχνᾱ, τέχνη293, 295
τέως308
τῆλε53, 283
τήμερον163
-της, -τα23
τῆτες163
τῑ́ɛ̄ν329
τιθέναι150, 276, 329, 90, 176, 272, 322, 90, 112, 176, 272, 273, 98, 99, 112, 112, 203, 276, 277, 203, 204, 220,
126, 203, 204, 225, 203, 275, 325, 150, 314
τίκτɛ̄ν116, 183, 206, 21, 183, 206, 277
τῑμᾱ́, τῑμή197, 285
τῑμᾶν197, 309, 319, 309, 319, 276
τίνɛ̄ν, τῑ́νɛ̄ν180, 285, 317, 180, 283
τίς258 (paradigm), 339, 145, 258 (paradigm), 285, 339, 138
τις334, 120, 285
Τίρυνς342
τιτρώσκɛ̄ν185, 206, 293, 185, 206, 293
τλᾱ-, ἔτλᾱν, ἔτλη, τλῆ, ἔτλαν202, 221
τλᾱτός, τλητός103, 251, 301
Τληπόλεμος336
τόρμος17, 78, 240
τόσος165, 275
τόφρα149
τράπεζα289
τρέμɛ̄ν187, 200
τρɛ̃ν135, 137, 187, 290
τρέπɛ̄ν187, 200, 207, 289, 207, 291, 310


===== PDF PAGE 411 =====
τρɛ̃ς: τρῖς260, 261, 314, 313, 101
τρέφɛ̄ν123, 148, 323, 128, 148
τρέχɛ̄ν, ἀποθρέξεσθαι148
τρήρων137, 140, 290
τρητός103, 183
-τρια101
τριᾱκάσιος (acc. pl.) 273, 313, 273
τρῑ́βɛ̄ν: τετρίφαται310
τριπανᾱγόρσιος289
τρισχɛ̄λίōς266
τρίτω321
τρομɛ̃ν200
τροπɛ̃ν200
τρόχος77
τροχός78, 148, 239
τύ168, 258 (paradigm)
τυγχάνɛ̄ν149, 296, 149, 207, 207
τύπτɛ̄ν191 fn. 14, 215
τυφλός: θυφλός152
-ύ- ~ -έϝ269
ὑγιής106, 120, 151, 306 with fn. 6
ὕδρος240
ὕδωρ151, 238, 248, 339, 238, 248
῞ῡɛ̄ν132, 192, 151
῾ῡετός340
υἱύς151, 244, 269 fn. 4, 313
῾ῡμέ151, 311, 311
ὐμέναιος132 fn. 27
῾ῡμήν132 with fn. 27, 151
Ὑμηττός342
-ῡνε/ο- (pres.) 199, 338
ὐνιερṓσει326
ὑπαρχέμεν278
ὐπασδεύξαισα315
ὑπέρ151, 333
ὑπερᾱμεριᾱ́ων318
ὑπό151, 333
ὑποκλοπέοιτο200
ὑποκύψει (subj.) 225
ὑπολίζονες154
ὕπνος120, 151
ὗς102, 132, 151, 249
ὑσμῑ́νη107, 151
ὕστερος121, 152, 252, 313
ὑφαίνɛ̄ν102, 115, 125, 152, 161, 183
ὕψιον155
φα- ~ φν-: πέφαται127, 222, 283, 150, 208, 283
φαγɛ̃ν206
φαɛ̄νός, φάεννον266


===== PDF PAGE 412 =====
φαίνεσθαι, φανῆναι161
φάναι174, 232–3, 91, 125, 174, 272, 300, 273, 273, 315, 129, 150
p. 377φάρμακον, φαρμάσσɛ̄ν, φαρμάττɛ̄ν, φαρμάσσων194
φάρος, φᾶρος, φᾱ́ρεα317
φάτις244, 274
φέβεσθαι200
πεφιδέσθαι150
φέρɛ̄ν125, 186, 200, 209, 276, 276, 320, 276, 277, 34, 314, 38, 146, 146, 325, 146, 175 fn. 1, 112, 146, 112, 300
φεύγɛ̄ν188, 277, 321, 125, 207
φήμη241, 303
φθάνɛ̄ν, φθᾱ́νειν180, 317
φθɛ̄́ρ341
φθήρων320, 327
φθίνɛ̄ν, φθῑ́νɛ̄ν180, 317, 180, 202, 205, 205
-φι55, 125, 150
φῑ́κατι273
φιλέɛ̄ν196, 214, 320
φιλομμειδής134
φίλος155, 196, 155
φλοιός341
φοβɛ̃ν200
φόνος119, 127
φορβᾱ́, φορβή282, 283
φορɛ̃ν200, 35
φράδμων167
φράζεσθαι167, 150
φρᾱ́τηρ125, 247, 304
φρήν237 (partial paradigm)
φροίμιον143 fn. 35
φυγαδεύɛ̄ν, φυγαδείην199
φυγή78, 241
φῡ́ɛ̄ν, φυίει269 fn. 4, 190, 102, 125, 202, 220
φύλαξ, φύλακ163, 194
φυλάσσɛ̄ν163, 194, 213, 163, 194, 213, 150, 152
φύλλον341
πεφυτευκῆμεν277
φωνᾱ́, φωνή91, 169, 300
φώρ237, 247, 237
χαίρɛ̄ν160 (2x), 191, 290, 160, 215, 150
χαίτη127
χάλαισι295, 225
χαλεπός, χαλέπτει194
χάλκευον199, 199, 249
χαμαί25 with fn. 17, 113, 114, 126, 233
χᾱ́ν126, 249, 126, 140, 249
χανδάνɛ̄ν182, 206, 224, 296, 182, 206, 224, 182, 224, 182, 224
χαρίεντ80
χάσκɛ̄ν, χανɛ̃ν185, 206, 150
χέζɛ̄ν166


===== PDF PAGE 413 =====
χειμών246
χειλίων, χέλλιας126, 140, 266, 266
χέλῡς127, 243
χɛ̃ν126, 309, 213, 309, 203, 150, 222, 224
χɛ̄́ρ126, 140, 147, 238 (partial paradigm), 247, 267, 339, 247, 267
χερνίβα284
χɛ̄́ρων (χείρων) 154
χήρᾱ, χήρη, χῆρος304
χθές123
χθών21, 113 (paradigm), 116, 238 (paradigm), 246, 116
χίμαρος, χίμαιρα161
χίμετλα113
χιών113, 126, 153, 238 (paradigm), 246
χλωρός104, 340
χόλος, χολõσθαι197
χόρτος239
ἔχραε205
χρɛ̄́μασιν, χρɛ̄μάτεσσι277 fn. 7
χρῆσαι176, 150
χρόᾱ341
χρῡσῆ302, 337
χρῡσήορος93
χρῡσός342
χρώς341
χωρɛ̃ν196
χῶρος196, 321
ψάλτρια101
ψάμμος340
ψῡ́χɛ̄ν, ψῡχρός341
ὠδῶι ‘threshold’ 317
ὠθɛ̃ν201, 214, 214
-ῶι (dat. sg.) 169 with fn. 50
ὠιόν241, 339
ὠκύς253, 320
ὦλκα238
ὦμος140, 142, 145, 239
-ων (thematic ptc. masc. nom. sg.) 254
-ῶν (gen. pl.) 91, 169, 308
-ώνδᾱς338
ὠνɛ̃σθαι, ὠνῆι193
ὦνος142
p. 378ὦπα238, 248, 281
ὥρᾱ107
ὦρος ‘boundary’ 317
ͷις286
Cyprian
a-u-ta-ra- *αὐτάρ289
a-no-ko-ne  *ἄνωγον221
to-e-na-i  *δοέναι, to-we-na-i  *δοϝέναι276


===== PDF PAGE 414 =====
e-ke-ne  *ἔχεν276, 272
e-we-xe  *ἔϝεξε212
i-na-la-li-si-me-na 218
ka-ra-si-ti  *γράσθι175
ka-si-ke-ne-to-se  *κασιγνήτο(ν)ς274
ka-te-ti-ja-ne  *κατέθιjαν295
ka-te-wo-ro-ko-ne  *κατήϝοργον108, 289
ke-i-to-i 294
ku-me-re-na-i  *κυμερῆναι295
o-mo-mo-ko-ne  *ὀμώμοκον218, 221
o-te 279
pa-si-le-wo-se  *βασιλῆϝος308
pe-i-se-i 283
si-se 286
ti-we-i-pi-lo  *Διϝείφιλος234
to-na-i-lo-ne  *τõν αἴλōν160
Mycenaean
a-ke-ra₂-te 144
a-mo 144
a-pe-i-si 272
a-pi-po-re-we 249
a-ra-ro-mo-te-me-no 222
a-ra-ru-wo-a 298
a-ro-a,  a-ro₂-e 298
a-to-po-qo 282 fn. 13
a-to-ro-qo 282
ai-ka-sa-ma 293
de-de-me-no 222
de-me-o-te 224
de-ko-to 175, 294
di-do-si 272, 273, 204
di-u-jo ~ di-wi-jo 269
e-e-si 314
e-ke-e 229, 276, 229
e-ko-si 272
e-me 113, 260
e-pi-ko-ru-si-jo,  o-pi-ko-ru-si-ja 274
e-ra-se 214
e-re-u-te-ro-se 214
e-u-ke-to 127, 229
i-je-re-ja 267
i-je-re-u 249, 280 fn. 11, 337
i-qo 118
jo-qi 285
ka-ke-u 249, 337
ka-zo-e 155, 163, 298
ke-ka-u-me-no 222
ke-ni-qa 284
ke-ra-me-u 249


===== PDF PAGE 415 =====
ke-se-nu-wo 317
ki-ti-je-si 116, 174, 273
ko-ri-si-jo 274
ko-wa 304, 317, 317
ma-to-(ro-)pu-ro 289
me-sa-to 165, 275
me-u-jo ~ me-wi-jo 154 fn. 42, 269, 298
me-zo-e,  me-zo-a₂154, 166, 298
no-pe-re-a₂105
-o-jo (gen. sg.) 138
o-pi 89, 100, 333
o-te 279
o-wo-we 245
pa-si ‘says’ 272
pa-si ‘all’ (dat. pl.) 168
pa-we-a₂136, 317
pe-ma ~ pe-mo 114
pe-ru-si-nu-wo 273
-pi 55, 234
po-pi 125
po-qa 282
qa-si-re-u 249, 282, 337
qe-qi-no-me-no, qe-qi-no-to 222, 285
qe-to-ro 283
qe-to-ro-po-pi 289
qi-ri-ja-to 281
qo-o, qo-u 282
qo-u-ko-ro 120
ra-pte, ra-pte-re, ra-pi-ti-ra₂162
re-wo-te-re-jo, re-wo-to-ro-ko-wo 293
te-ke 204
te-tu-ko-wo-a₂223, 232, 298
to-pe-za 289
to-so 165, 275
tu-ka-ṭạ-ṣị/tu-ka-to-si 289
wa-na-ka 249
wa-tu 244
-wo-e (pf. ptc.) 298
wo-wo 317
wo-ze 190, 289, 276, 289, 289
za-ku-si-jo 274
za-we-te 163
ze-so-me-no 158
ze-u-ke-si 158
